[Amit Varma]: My guest in the episode today once said something that reveals the power of popular culture.
[Amit Varma]: In his younger days, in the 1990s, he spoke about how he once watched a film on a Friday
[Amit Varma]: in which a character played by Renuka Shahane died. He was so disturbed by it that he waited
[Amit Varma]: until that Monday for a show called Surabhi to air on television so that he could see
[Amit Varma]: Shahane alive again. He said he had tears in his eyes. This, to me, is not a random
[Amit Varma]: cheesy story about a young person, but a reflection of how much stories matter to all of us, and
[Amit Varma]: the emotional resonance of culture. Films and music and books are not just entertainment
[Amit Varma]: and escape. They provide us with the backdrop of our dreams, the soundtrack of our lives,
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes even the backbone of our existence. They help us make sense of the world even
[Amit Varma]: when little of sense seems to be happening in it. They help us make sense of our own
[Amit Varma]: selves through the lives of others. This is why the importance of art is highest in the
[Amit Varma]: darkest of times. As my guest said once, the worst time to be an artist may just be the
[Amit Varma]: best time to be an artist. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Varun
[Amit Varma]: Grover, writer, screenwriter, lyricist, comedian, filmmaker, in fact, so many things that it
[Amit Varma]: feels reductive to try and spell them all out. I've been a fan of both Varun's work
[Amit Varma]: and his fearlessness for many years now, and we've been talking about doing this episode
[Amit Varma]: for a while. I'm so glad we finally made it happen in an eventful recording that faced
[Amit Varma]: a few disruptions, though thankfully, nothing from the state. At one point, we interrupted
[Amit Varma]: the recording because of a large fire we could see from the window of my home studio, and
[Amit Varma]: we lost a little bit of audio near the start because of which my early question about the
[Amit Varma]: media might feel a bit abrupt. But I loved the conversation I had. We had so much fun
[Amit Varma]: rambling here and there as the hours went by that we forgot to discuss some of the key
[Amit Varma]: things I wanted to discuss with Varun, such as the craft of comedy and writing lyrics.
[Amit Varma]: At which point, you might ask, ki phir baat kya kya? Well, you'll have to listen to find
[Amit Varma]: out we had a blast. Before we start, a public service announcement. Registration is open
[Amit Varma]: for the September cohort of my writing course, The Art of Clear Writing. The course kicks
[Amit Varma]: off on Saturday, September 10. And you can go to indiauncut.com slash clear writing to
[Amit Varma]: register. And now let's go to a unique kind of commercial break. Capital Gyaan by Deepak
[Amit Varma]: Chinnoy. This is like a show within a commercial from the kind sponsors of this episode, Capital
[Unknown]: Mind. Did you know that Indian equity markets make more money when they're closed than when
[Unknown]: they're open? More than 90% of the nifty and sensex returns since 2009 have happened overnight
[Unknown]: between 3.30pm and 9am when the markets are asleep. Every crazy event makes you want to
[Unknown]: respond to tweak your investments and it never seems to be enough. If you want to grow your
[Unknown]: money, you have to let some of it sleep through the madness of everyday life. Deciding not
[Unknown]: to react can often be the best action you can take. Talk to us and let us make the right
[Unknown]: decisions for you so you don't have to. I'm Deepak Chinnoy, CEO at Capital Mind. Take
[Unknown]: a look at our portfolio management service at cm.social slash seen unseen. Worry less
[Unknown]: about your money and make it work for you. That's cm.social slash seen unseen. Hey, I
[Amit Varma]: want to repeat that URL cm.social slash seen unseen. Deepak has been a guest on my podcast
[Amit Varma]: and he handles my money as well. My actions are the best endorsement. Varun, welcome to
[Guest]: the scene in the unseen. Ji shukriya, bohot time se sun rahe hain and I've been a huge
[Guest]: fan of India Uncut. One of one of those early Indian, I would say success stories in the
[Guest]: internet space. And I was almost a fanboy. I would say almost because I've always been
[Guest]: aware about the idea of being fanboys is slightly problematic. But I still I was constantly
[Guest]: always following waiting for new, you know, posts on on India Uncut or one of the high
[Guest]: points of my blogging life was that at one point, India Uncut had linked a story on my
[Guest]: satire blog and it got lots of traffic. So it's it's been whatever I think 16 years since
[Guest]: that happened, probably might have happened in 2005 or 2006. And this is the first time
[Guest]: we are actually talking. So it's, it's a it's a bit of a landmark for me.
[Amit Varma]: Well, thank you. That's so kind of you. And I should say it's a landmark for me because
[Amit Varma]: I've admired your work all these years as well, not just your work per se, but also
[Amit Varma]: the breadth of your work. So I have a question which I think applies to in a sense both the
[Amit Varma]: media and the arts, which is that if you sort of look at the media, you can look at it in
[Amit Varma]: two ways. One way is that the media is fulfilling supply and demand, people want information,
[Amit Varma]: people want narratives, media fulfills that demand, jab tak profitable hai, chalte raho,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where do the salaries come from, the bottom line is important, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. That is the imperative and that is the justification a lot of people will
[Amit Varma]: give you. Other people like I think you and me would believe that there is something higher
[Amit Varma]: there. You know, you can get into the cliches of afflicting the comfortable, comforting
[Amit Varma]: the afflicted or we can talk about speaking truth to power, first draft of history, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah. Leaving the cliches aside, there is this sense we have that there is something
[Amit Varma]: more that we don't follow that demand, but we shape it in a certain way that there are
[Amit Varma]: certain things we have to cover certain things we have to write about. And this almost seems
[Amit Varma]: like a binary, it's it's hard to sort of find a continuum between them or find a compromise
[Amit Varma]: ground. And what we see what I see in the media is that, you know, there is that old
[Amit Varma]: saying from rock, if you ain't got nothing, you got nothing to lose. And it's the same
[Amit Varma]: thing that your big media houses will, you know, kowtow before the powers the most because
[Amit Varma]: they have the most to lose. You could be running a daily newspaper, but the group that owns
[Amit Varma]: you also as a chemical factory, wahan pe IT raid ho jayegi, blah, blah, blah, you have
[Amit Varma]: so much to lose that those guys basically follow the imperatives of the first sort with
[Amit Varma]: just to survive, they have to crawl, as it were, whereas the fighters that you see people
[Amit Varma]: like alt news and scroll and wire and news minute and so on. They are much smaller operations
[Amit Varma]: and independent operations. And they are of course, full of brave people, risking a lot
[Amit Varma]: personally, but at the same time, in terms of what there is to lose, there is not so
[Amit Varma]: much old money behind that. And all of that you look at alt news, what Prateek and Zubair
[Amit Varma]: do, it's basically a labor of love, you know, jab tak chalega chalega after that it is what
[Amit Varma]: it is, it's a labor of love and people recognize it as such. So this makes me sort of wonder
[Amit Varma]: about which side of the line do we come down on, you know, and and the same question would
[Amit Varma]: really apply to the arts, because arts me bhi wahi funda hai that if I am an OTT platform,
[Amit Varma]: the logical thing for me would not be to have political content in there, not take pangas
[Amit Varma]: in any way. I was rewatching Masaan yesterday and I started on Hotstar. And Hotstar pe poora
[Guest]: scene kaat diya, like you know about that, right? Das minute kaat diya usme se, shurume.
[Amit Varma]: The bedroom scene. And I managed to, I said then forget it, I'll just watch it on Netflix.
[Amit Varma]: Now according to Google, your runtime is 1 hour 49 minutes, Hotstar pe 1 hour 36 sa.
[Amit Varma]: Ispe bhi Netflix pe 1 hour 46 tha, toh 3 minute kahin gaye, pata nahi kaha gaye. But from
[Amit Varma]: what I remember, I couldn't figure out kya kaata hai. But so the thing is, you understand
[Amit Varma]: the imperatives of some of these big guys. But at the same time, you have independent
[Amit Varma]: artists saying ki nahi mujhe jo karna hai, karenge. And those voices will always be from
[Amit Varma]: the margins, no mainstream house is going to take off. And simultaneously, to add a
[Amit Varma]: different theme to that, we're living in an age where I think the mainstream is dissipating.
[Amit Varma]: More and more creators like us have the tools of production at our hands, we can make whatever
[Amit Varma]: we want, put it out, we don't have to go through gatekeepers, we don't have to worry about
[Amit Varma]: these other imperatives. So what are your thoughts on the trade offs involved here?
[Amit Varma]: Because the rational line that many of the big media houses would take that a Netflix
[Amit Varma]: or a Hotstar would take that boss, we have to survive, panga kyu lene ka, there is too
[Amit Varma]: much to lose, you know, for 1% of the art, why should we put 99% at risk? That's a rational
[Amit Varma]: line. But at the same time, you know, that 1% is the most important.
[Guest]: So mera yeh maana hai ki news media jo hai khas karke, the two kind of categories you
[Guest]: mentioned, one is the big media houses who have a lot to lose. And that's why we are
[Guest]: kind of, they are kind of crawling and all that. But I think usse zyada kuch yaha ho
[Guest]: raha hai, abhi jo ho raha hai. We can't compare this thing to the emergency where I would
[Guest]: say ki media ko pata tha sahi aur galat kya hai, aur wo because of the political pressure
[Guest]: and because of whatever the gains they had to make, they were choosing the wrong. This
[Guest]: time, I think the distinction is gone. They don't really know what is right or what is
[Guest]: wrong. They're not deliberately choosing the wrong. They are actually choosing the right,
[Guest]: what they think is right. So it's not like they are being pressurized into doing something.
[Guest]: I think that's what they always wanted to do. That's the thing. And this time there
[Guest]: is, so it's like win-win. Wo karna bhi wohi chahate the. Usi tare ka zahar phailana, usi
[Guest]: tare ka divisiveness. Divisiveness is the outcome of what they are doing. But the statements
[Guest]: or the line they are choosing or the news they are trying or, you know, the overall
[Guest]: agenda of the news right now completely aligns with, I would say, most of the anchors who
[Guest]: are delivering that news or most of the reporters who are reporting or most of the houses that
[Guest]: are, you know, the big moneybags who are running these channels. So it's slightly different
[Guest]: from isliye is baar woh bhi nahi hai ki we can't say they were asked to bend and they
[Guest]: crawled and all. No one actually had to even ask this time. This is a very natural allyship
[Guest]: in a way, what is happening and what we are seeing. And that's why it's not like ki ye
[Guest]: badal jaayega agar sarkaar badli jo ki, matlab, anyway, I don't know, woh kab hone wala hai
[Guest]: ki nahi. It's slightly different. And exactly so, jo aapne bola jo ki, kuch log jo fight
[Guest]: back kar rahe hain, Alt News and News Minute and Wire and Scroll and many other independent
[Guest]: whatever, journalists and fact checkers. Again, they are not, you know, they are not doing
[Guest]: it because they have nothing to lose. Of course, all of us have something to lose. So dono
[Guest]: taraf is samay jo bhi ho raha hai, woh bahut core belief ke saath ho raha hai. We believe
[Guest]: in certain things and that's why we are doing this, whatever we are doing. So that I think
[Guest]: is a major, whatever, departure from what emergency was or what generally how we see
[Guest]: the world over when, you know, when certain regimes kind of pressurize the media to behave
[Guest]: a certain way and they do. This time I think it is a, it is a, it is quite a natural allyship.
[Guest]: Toh woh hai. Lekin haan, uske baad aapka jo doosra sawal tha, which was about the arts
[Guest]: and which is also in a way related ki, film jo censor karke aa jaati hai ya bahut saari
[Guest]: cheezon mein censorship, arts mein, cinema mein ho rahi hai. Waha pe, yes, in some of
[Guest]: the cases it is because of the people at the helm in various media organizations which
[Guest]: are, let's say, the art-based, this thing. Toh waha pe, shayad yeh na ho ki woh, naturally
[Guest]: woh chahate hoon ki, haan, isko censorship kar diya jaye. But yeah, so they are choosing
[Guest]: the path of least resistance and maximum profits. Aur woh, woh bhi kaafi, manna woh ek bahut
[Guest]: purana system hai, jo ki, as, I don't know, have you seen this film called The Network?
[Amit Varma]: Network 1976. 70s ka film. I saw it as a kid, Peter Finch and all that, right? I saw it
[Guest]: as a kid, I don't remember. Yeah, so usme ek scene hai, usme, there is a news anchor
[Guest]: who because of some traumatic event, he comes, he is fired from his channel but then he comes
[Guest]: back and he starts delivering a very rousing lecture on TV about, if you're angry and,
[Guest]: you know, just open your windows and scream that I'm done, I'm done with it and all that.
[Guest]: I don't remember the exact line. And that guy becomes a cult in its own self. Aur woh
[Guest]: ek tarah ki cult bana leta hai, TV, kyunki woh achanak se woh us tarah ki ek harkat TV
[Guest]: pe karta hai ki woh bahut TRP aa jata hai, toh usko wapas TV pe laana padta hai un logon
[Guest]: ko. Toh I think Simon Beale, his name was in the film. And then that cult starts growing
[Guest]: and channels are kind of, the channel is making profits because of that show getting lots
[Guest]: of TRPs and it's almost like, it's a mix of what I would say, Kiran Bedi ki Adalat meets
[Guest]: one of those angry anchors jo bolta hai ki chayan se sona hai toh jaag jao and all that,
[Guest]: meets Arnab Goswami in many ways where it's just unbridled rage on TV and people just
[Guest]: love watching that kind of rage, someone going completely unhinged on TV. So, teen chaar
[Guest]: cheezon ka and extreme righteousness which flows through this guy. Toh chaar paan cheeze
[Guest]: hoti hai and then at some point in the arc, his speeches become about actually bringing
[Guest]: down capitalism and bringing down this big channel he's part of. And then he's brought
[Guest]: to a meeting with the channel boss and the network boss actually who has many, many channels
[Guest]: under them and other stuff also. And then this guy gets him into a huge room and there's
[Guest]: a huge table which is like probably 100 seater kind of a table. Toh uske ek edge pe wo boss
[Guest]: khada hota hai aur ek edge pe isko bithata hai. And then he gives him this speech about
[Guest]: basically, apna muh band rakho because there are no countries, there are no nations, there
[Guest]: are no people, there is only one thing which is business, which is money. So, he gives
[Guest]: him that basically almost the basics of our existence in this century and previous one
[Guest]: I think. Toh wo sabse bada sach hai jo hamesha se raha hai ki kuch bhi nahi hai. Yeh jo hum
[Guest]: theek hai, hum har cheez choti, badi, bahut cheezon ko leke hum log ladte hain. Aur wo
[Guest]: caste bhi hai, aur wo religion bhi hai, aur wo nationality bhi hai. Kai baar log Mohamad
[Guest]: Rafi aur Kishore Kumar ko leke bhi lad jaate hain. Wo utne bhi camps bane hue hain bahut
[Guest]: leke. But ultimately what this guy says and what I think is the truth of our modern societies,
[Guest]: everything is ultimately money and that's also one of the reasons why I think lots of
[Guest]: decisions by the media right now are, you know, kind of justified with that even if
[Guest]: no matter how horrible. Some of these people, I'm sure, have conscience. Are not like completely,
[Guest]: you know, aisa nahi hai ki wo subhe jab card swipe karte hain andar jaane ke liye toh unki
[Guest]: aatma wahan chali jaate hain andar. Aatma leke jaate hunge andar. But they justified by that
[Guest]: thing. So, they have been kind of trained to look at the numbers and not humans in a
[Guest]: way or the human cost of it. So, bahut sari yeh sari cheezon ke beech mein art akele kaise
[Guest]: survive karege, wo pata nahi. But art has survived for like through all these things.
[Guest]: And there's one thing I say this that the worst time to do comedy is actually the best
[Guest]: time to do comedy, which is true for every art. So, worst time for any art is the best
[Guest]: time for that art because jo cheez aapko, art ko, artist ko, sorry, I'll go thoda peeche.
[Guest]: Toh ek baar kisi ne mujhse sawal poocha tha, kyunki usse kisi ne poocha tha, ki kavita logon
[Guest]: ko kyun chahiye? Poetry kyun chahiye? What is the need of this, you know, need of poetry
[Guest]: in this world? Is duniya mein poetry kisne maangi hai? Okay, people may ask for, let's
[Guest]: say, cinema, which is something more tangible, you can see. Poetry kisko chahiye aur kyun
[Guest]: chahiye? Aur uska jawab mujhe bahut time tak nahi mila tha, phir mujhe ek kavita mi thi.
[Guest]: Mere paas matlab koi aisa convincing jawab nahi tha, kisi ek, jisne poocha hai, agar wo,
[Guest]: shayad kisi, more chances, kisi engineering graduate ne poocha tha, jo kisi software company
[Guest]: mein kaam kar raha tha. Aap bhi engineering graduate the, software
[Guest]: company mein kaam kiye the. Haan, isliye mujhe pata hai ki wahan aise
[Guest]: sawal aa sakte hain wahan bhi. Kyunki main aise bahut saare logon se mila hun aur abhi
[Guest]: tak milta rehta hun ki, asking ki, aur general ek jo atmosphere bhi pitle kuch saalon se
[Guest]: banaya gaya hai against liberal arts or generally any kind of slightly intellectual activity.
[Guest]: Wo ek anti-intellectualism ka jo daur hai, jo poori duniya mein chal raha hai. Humare
[Guest]: yaha uska ek thoda alag, I think, kya boleng, variant hai, variant acha sabd hai aaj kare
[Guest]: in cheezon ke liye. So, but haan, to poetry kise chahiye aur kyun chahiye? Iska jawab
[Guest]: mujhe bahut tangentially hi mila, wo main abhi bhi samjha shayad nahi sakta hun us aadmi
[Guest]: ko, jisne sawal poocha tha. But the thing is people have these very strong
[Guest]: distinctions ki yeh poetry hai, yeh art hai, yeh science hai, yeh technology hai, yeh business
[Guest]: hai, yeh linguistics hai, while living in a world which is flowing very smoothly from
[Guest]: one thing to another. They are constantly, we are constantly moving and constantly doing
[Guest]: things. Agar humne ghar mein apne phone charge pe lagaya hua hai, charger se nikala aur humne
[Guest]: jaake TV on kiya, ya chai banayi, ya kuch bhi kiya. We are flowing between multiple
[Guest]: things, a lot of which are actually result of, I would say, poetry because someone, somewhere
[Guest]: got the sense of rhythm from learning or listening to music or poetry and that rhythm is what
[Guest]: our life is or what makes our life easier to live or a joy to live a lot of times.
[Guest]: Toh design jo hai, mujhe yeh samjh aaya, ultimately design is the core aur samjh, matlab aisa nahi
[Guest]: ki mujhe jo samjh aaya hai, wo sach hai poora, but haan mujhe aisa lagta hai ki design is
[Guest]: the core of everything, right from poetry to our daily utilities, to cinema, to music
[Guest]: to and when I say design, it means three, four things. One, the aesthetic of it, which
[Guest]: is very, very generally a bit of an abstract thing, but aesthetics humara dimaag samjh
[Guest]: jaata hai, bhale hi hum zabaan se nahi bol paye, ki okay, kuch cheezein humko pasand
[Guest]: aati hain, kuch cheezein nahi pasand aati hain aur koi humare paas uska jawab nahi
[Guest]: hota hai, toh generally ek aesthetic feel hota hai uska. Doosra hai, sense of balance,
[Guest]: symmetry aur asymmetry, which is again a choice, sometimes we choose asymmetry, sometimes we
[Guest]: choose symmetry, toh symmetry, aesthetic and flow, generally film industry mein ek tare
[Guest]: ka joke hai and people hate people who say this, ki koi bhi cheezein aap script padhe
[Guest]: hain aur phir kisi ko padhne ko deyen aur bole ki maza nahi aaya, kyu nahi aaya maza.
[Guest]: Toh samjhana logon ke liye mushkil hota hai, lekin log kehte hain feel nahi aayi. Toh feel
[Guest]: nahi aayi jo hai, ultimately uske peeche, I think a lot of times it is the symmetry
[Guest]: of things. They don't get the exact, it's a very, it's almost like making an alchemic
[Guest]: portion where every element has to be in a very microgram kind of way correctly. Woh
[Guest]: poetry mein, again you can see that balance. So, is tare ki bahut hi, again I know all
[Guest]: of it is very, very abstract and I generally, you know, mushkil sawalon ke jawaab humesha
[Guest]: mere paas abstract mein hote hain. Lekin poetry isliye chahiye, kyuki agar aapko chai bhi
[Guest]: peeni hai toh aapko poetry chahiye, agar aapko phone charge karna hai poetry chahiye, aapko
[Guest]: flight leni hai, aapko poetry chahiye, ya train leni hai, kuch bhi. All of it is put
[Guest]: into this almost like a, so of course, poetry ekdum alag cheez hai, but poetry is the, you
[Guest]: can say, ho sakta un sab cheezon se poetry nikli ho. That is also, I think, a good enough,
[Guest]: good enough reason to love poetry, that it is a combination of all the good things in
[Guest]: our lives around us. Aur poetry se woh cheeze nikli hain toh aur bhi achcha hai. So, either
[Guest]: ways I think that was something which I kind of figured out slowly that the sense of whatever
[Guest]: basic designs of things, jaise yeh table hai, iski yeh jo rounded edge hai, yeh sharp hoti
[Guest]: toh abhi yahan pe haath rakhne mein dikkat hoti. Someone thought of it and whoever thought
[Guest]: of it actually started with an abstract thought. It was not like ki, kyuki round shape is something
[Guest]: which will, you know, I don't know, which will come to you in a very stream, stream
[Guest]: of consciousness kind of a thing. Toh yeh saari cheezein waha se judhi hui lagti hai mujhe.
[Guest]: Aur uske beech mein hum art aur usko distinct karne ke liye hum log baithe rehte hain, but
[Guest]: trying to get back to where we started from, but I kind of.
[Amit Varma]: I think you were talking about this friend of yours who asked yourself, why do we need
[Guest]: poetry? Yeah, lekin uske pehle bhi I think, so I
[Guest]: remember this story, like yahaan mein aaya tha, kyuki shayad we were talking about people
[Guest]: trying to suppress art in a way and who are these people or what kind of people are these.
[Guest]: And the thing is, so basically agar har cheez mein poetry aur har cheez mein art hai, toh
[Guest]: log yeh samajh nahi paatein ki yeh sab ek hi hai, business bhi, they do try to do that
[Guest]: thing, but ultimately I don't think they will succeed because art flourishes in these kind
[Guest]: of situations, jahan pe aap dabhani ki koshish karein, jahan pe aap bolein ki ab toh jage
[Guest]: hi nahi hai, tum nahi bol sakte ho. Ab tum nahi bol sakte ho is exactly the kind
[Guest]: of space jahan se yeh table ki rounded edge aayi hogi, jahan se koi bhi naya thought aaya
[Guest]: hoga pehli baar kisi ko. So that is, I think that's a good, of course, with all the privilege
[Guest]: I have of saying that, okay, it's a good challenge to have people around you who don't want you
[Guest]: to say stuff. Then you have to find ways to say that stuff or find stuff which they also
[Guest]: don't know exists and can be talked about. Unke paas ek kitab hai ki yeh list hai us
[Guest]: kitab mein ki yeh nahi bolna hai, iske baare mein nahi bolna hai, is tarah se nahi bolna
[Guest]: hai. So either you invent, sometimes you invent new phrasing, sometimes you invent new thoughts
[Guest]: and sometimes you end up inventing new languages to talk about the stuff which they don't want
[Guest]: to be talked about. So that I think is a good, whatever, good challenge for artists.
[Amit Varma]: So many things to double click on. What you just said is, it's like a Chinese doll, there
[Amit Varma]: are like different layers within it and I'm just going to one of those dolls and talk
[Amit Varma]: about, so I'll just think aloud from where you left off and that actually makes a lot
[Amit Varma]: of sense to me what you just said. And I'll go into this slightly controversial space
[Amit Varma]: about art and craft where I know many people will disagree with me. But the way I see it
[Amit Varma]: is that everything we do, in everything we do, we are responding in ways that we are
[Amit Varma]: wired to by default, right? So if I like a particular piece of music, it is because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a particular combination of notes will set off reactions in particular neurons
[Amit Varma]: of mind, which might release dopamine, which might release something else. I'll, you know,
[Amit Varma]: feel that a piano is tuneful, but an electric drill is noisy, and we are wired to find that
[Amit Varma]: one is noise and the other is music if it's played properly. And those are kind of wirings.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the point is, most of the time, the different ways in which we are getting manipulated by
[Amit Varma]: what is around us, we are not aware of it, and we can't control it. So it is an uncontrollable,
[Amit Varma]: you know, an omniscient engineer, as it were, may be able to see where all the pieces fit.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, you can't. For example, I read this interesting study recently that if you
[Amit Varma]: are making a pitch to someone, you know, if they if they're drinking a warm drink, they're
[Amit Varma]: more likely to say yes. And if they're drinking a cold drink, now, this could be one of those
[Amit Varma]: behavioral psychology experiments, which you can't really replicate. But there are all
[Amit Varma]: kinds of fascinating things going on under the surface. I get your point that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are things which have a direct impact on us, which we can measure and understand
[Amit Varma]: that I am feeling this way because of this. And there are other things where we don't
[Amit Varma]: know why we are feeling in a particular way. A poem could make me want to cry, but I may
[Amit Varma]: not be able to tell you exactly why. I just know that I feel that way. If I had enough
[Amit Varma]: knowledge, I could tell you the science behind it. But obviously, we don't. So it seems art
[Amit Varma]: and this is why I've kind of also come to believe and this is a sideways point that
[Amit Varma]: actually craft and art are the same thing. But when there is craft where we cannot understand
[Amit Varma]: the mechanics, like why a poem makes me cry, we call it art, but it's actually craft happening
[Amit Varma]: subconsciously. Because I get a lot of pushback when I say this.
[Guest]: That craft and art are same thing? Yeah. Really? Okay. I don't know. No, I think I don't understand
[Guest]: why the pushback because yeah, maybe people think that art is slightly more refined form
[Guest]: of craft or something or artists are more valuable than craftsperson. Maybe that's what
[Guest]: they think. But no, but I completely agree on that. Craft and art are actually the same
[Guest]: thing. There are some things that we understand how they are happening. For example, like
[Guest]: look at some of the some of the sculptures, some of the folk arts people do and some of
[Guest]: the paintings and they'll, you know,
[Guest]: there will be some things that you won't be able to do even after 50 years of training.
[Guest]: So, by giving it the status of craft, which is given a little lower status, I don't, I
[Guest]: believe that's, that's just elitism for lack of a better word. But ultimately, yes, both
[Guest]: are processes. Some processes we understand and some processes we deliberately, yeah,
[Guest]: probably don't want people to understand and to call ourselves artists.
[Guest]: I've seen a lot of writers do that. And the writers benefit from that because you generally
[Guest]: have to deal with very oppressive producers. So, you have to keep that slight mystery of
[Guest]: ki main bahut soch ke maine yeh likha hai. Kai baar hota hai ki wo auto mein likha hota
[Guest]: hai apne jaate hue. Lekin if you actually reveal the value of it. So, sometimes actually
[Guest]: there is a just thinking like on the go. But there is actually a chance that a lot of art,
[Guest]: in fact, it's not a chance. I think a lot of art is fraud, but very little of craft
[Guest]: can be fraud. It is seen, it is right there. You can't cheat on that. Agar aapne wo achcha
[Guest]: kaam kiya hai, wo dikh raha hai, wo uske liye enough there are. So, craft is probably a
[Guest]: more peer-reviewed way of judging things. Like, okay, it is peer-reviewed, it is craft.
[Guest]: Something which doesn't require any peer-review is art. So, maybe we can say homeopathy is
[Guest]: art and allopathy is craft. My point is art can sometimes be homeopathy also.
[Amit Varma]: It can be like an example of fraud art basically. So, another of the Chinese boxes I wanted
[Amit Varma]: to touch down upon actually has something to do with, you know, one of the ways in which
[Amit Varma]: I have kind of, one, changed my mind during the course of this podcast. And two, also
[Amit Varma]: a realization I've had about something I was mistaken about all my life. Now, the thing
[Amit Varma]: is growing up in a sort of, you know, elite English-speaking bubble in big cities all
[Amit Varma]: my life, my conception of my country was that it's basically, you know, it's a liberal space,
[Amit Varma]: we're tolerant, we're secular, all of that. That was kind of my conception. Now, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as you kind of grow older, the different layers slip off your eyes. You see gender, you see
[Amit Varma]: caste, you see religion, you see all of those various areas in which, but that's not exactly
[Amit Varma]: true. And I remember I did an episode with JP Narayan once, episode 150, where I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, posed the notion to him that India is a deeply liberal society. And his point was
[Amit Varma]: no, but if you look at the opposite is also true, you know, that old cliche about India.
[Amit Varma]: And if you actually look at how assimilative we are in terms of food and clothes and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, you could also make the opposite case. Now, what I kind of my beginning premise
[Amit Varma]: still a few years ago always was that we are essentially we are liberal, we get along fine,
[Amit Varma]: we are a big melting pot, which is great, which is what I love about this country. And
[Amit Varma]: there are fringes and there are, you know, there are these moments on the fringe. What
[Amit Varma]: I have come to realize through talking with various guests like Akshay Mukul and many
[Amit Varma]: others on the show, is that that is not the case that this was our society was always
[Amit Varma]: deeply liberal. I have been in a small bubble, you know, in a sense, we are the fringe. And
[Amit Varma]: we never kind of saw this earlier. In fact, the larger point about the constitution that
[Amit Varma]: comes up here is that our constitution was a liberal constitution, not as liberal as
[Amit Varma]: I would like, but still more liberal than society was a liberal constitution imposed
[Amit Varma]: on an illiberal society. And as any former engineer would know, ki aap top down se you
[Amit Varma]: can't engineer society, you know, in that sense, Gandhi was right that our challenge
[Amit Varma]: is to change society from within. We could not do that. We put a constitution there,
[Amit Varma]: we put random laws there, and we assume ki society badal jayega. And today politics has
[Amit Varma]: caught up with society. And I thought of this because that point you made earlier about
[Amit Varma]: ki media mein aaj jo log hai na, it's not that they've been asked to bend in their crawling,
[Amit Varma]: wo waise hi hai. They are fundamentally, you know, bigoted and anti Muslim and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So they are going along with the program, you don't need to suppress democracy for this,
[Amit Varma]: you have true believers, this is the expression of our democracy. Now, my question to you
[Amit Varma]: as someone who is not so much from the same bubble as me, who's lived in small town India,
[Amit Varma]: who's, you know, spoken a different language and so on is, is this broadly true that we
[Amit Varma]: were always this illiberal and the politics is really supply responding to demand. And
[Amit Varma]: all of this was pent up inside people couldn't express it. But now they are emboldened to
[Amit Varma]: express their bigotry because they see everybody else around them openly expressing it. Or
[Amit Varma]: have we actually become sort of worse? And I know, you know, it becomes a vicious circle
[Amit Varma]: at some point in time. But what is your sense of that, like my deeply pessimistic sense
[Amit Varma]: is that, hey, we were always like this at some point or the other, this was inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And the liberal project as it were, however, you define liberal, the liberal project as
[Amit Varma]: it were, failed a long, long time ago.
[Guest]: So, yeah, I think we were always illiberal. I grew up in UP in the 80s and 80s and 90s.
[Guest]: It has always been so difficult for minorities, for Muslims, for Dalits in this country. It
[Guest]: was a bit of a give and take kind of a process, where somebody tried to take incentives, but
[Guest]: he got it, so others thought, yes, you get it. Then the one who was giving it, he thought,
[Guest]: yes, yes, you have to give it, so he started giving it. So, it was a process like that.
[Guest]: I don't think there was any clear plan. And that is one of our blessings that the people
[Guest]: in power rarely have a clear plan, and so we can find our way till they are picking up
[Guest]: the gun. We can reach the door in that time. So, things like that. But I think our country
[Guest]: has always been illiberal. And still, why did it not look so openly? There can be many
[Guest]: reasons. There was a certain incentive, just like now there is an incentive. There was
[Guest]: a certain incentive in showing yourself as a Gandhian, as a Nehruvian, and both of these,
[Guest]: when I say Gandhian and Nehruvian, both of these kind of represented in people's heads
[Guest]: the idea of a secular and, you know, all-encompassing nationalism, which kind of doesn't look at
[Guest]: caste or creed or, you know, gender was always, I think gender was never even discussed.
[Guest]: It has always been an illiberal aspect that no one is surprised, and it has always been
[Guest]: accepted that it is like that, and we will be like that. Gradually, when the Western
[Guest]: influence will come, we will gradually deteriorate or improve from whichever angle you want to
[Guest]: see this thing. But it has always been there, and why is it now being expressed more openly
[Guest]: from the front? Because now there is an incentive, and earlier there was an incentive for something
[Guest]: which was again not your true self, but that was something which you were putting up an
[Guest]: act, that yes, we go and accept every person as our own, and those kinds of things which
[Guest]: used to happen at that time, because of which a lot of people who were privileged enough
[Guest]: to live in a bubble from, and not just from the Hindu religion, but from, you know, Muslims
[Guest]: also, they were kind of spared the discrimination, and then they started believing in that to
[Guest]: be the only India that exists, a very, you know, accepting and very secular kind of an
[Guest]: image. But now it has happened that, as we are seeing in front of us, now the fire has
[Guest]: increased so much that now everyone is feeling its flame. So, the most privileged people
[Guest]: like us, who have always, you know, lived, and we are still, I mean, in many ways we
[Guest]: are not facing the heat of that oppression. But now at least we can see it, we can see
[Guest]: it happening to people around us, people like us, and now we are like, oh, this India has
[Guest]: suddenly become very bad. But India was like that, earlier it was for those people whom
[Guest]: we did not see, or whom we could not see, or could not be seen. Now you do not have
[Guest]: to look there. Now you can imagine that this is happening to us, so then, those who do
[Guest]: not have any power, and in today's times, power equals also social media presence.
[Guest]: So, if they are not there, then what kind of India they are seeing for the last 70-75
[Guest]: years, we can understand a little bit, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Just to give context to the listeners, what fire you are talking about, just now we were
[Amit Varma]: interrupted by this massive fire, we can see from my window here, which was in Chitrakoot
[Amit Varma]: studio. So, we actually took a little bit of a break, and Varun made a couple of calls
[Amit Varma]: and figured out that, okay, it happened on film set, but the information we have so far
[Amit Varma]: is that everyone is safe, and the smoke from that was like dwarfing the entire city, but
[Amit Varma]: you could look out of some other window and not see that smoke. And what you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: incentives is interesting, there was a Turkish sociologist called Timur Kuran, there is,
[Amit Varma]: he is still alive, who in 1999 wrote a book called Private Truths, Public Lies, and he
[Amit Varma]: came up in that with the term preference falsification. And preference falsification is you don't
[Amit Varma]: reveal what you are really feeling. So, the example he gave was that in Soviet Union,
[Amit Varma]: everybody hated the authorities, but nobody had the guts to say it, because everyone has
[Amit Varma]: the incentive to complain and you don't want to get into trouble. So, if you have a problem
[Amit Varma]: with the regime, you believe you are the only one to have a problem with the regime because
[Amit Varma]: you don't hear anyone else say it. So, your silence is preference falsification. And the
[Amit Varma]: term Kuran used for what happened when the Soviet Union fell apart was that there was
[Amit Varma]: a preference cascade, that you hear a few people expressing themselves, you realize
[Amit Varma]: you're not alone, and you go with it. And my sense is that social media did the same
[Amit Varma]: thing in India, that many of us were closet bigots. In private, you may hate Muslims,
[Amit Varma]: or you may think a woman's place is in the kitchen, or, you know, the person who works
[Amit Varma]: at your house, you leave him a different glass. But publicly, you may not express these things,
[Unknown]: you may project yourself as progressive or what you call Gandhian or whatever. But then
[Amit Varma]: social media tips the balance over, where suddenly you realize I'm not the only one,
[Amit Varma]: other people feel like me. And then you realize bloody hell, the majority feels like me. And
[Amit Varma]: that empowers you to kind of, you know, go for it. And what that also, I think, drives
[Amit Varma]: home is that, you know, one thing that I do believe is that we contain multitudes, that
[Amit Varma]: a bigot is not only a bigot, that nobody is kind of black and white. And the great failure,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, especially the great failure of our politics, as I see it today, is a narrative
[Amit Varma]: failure that we are not recognizing, you know, that somebody may have these unpleasant aspects
[Amit Varma]: to her character, but she may also want better schools for her children or whatever. And
[Amit Varma]: we are not building those narratives and appealing to them. And, you know, as a political philosopher
[Amit Varma]: Carl Schmitt said that the essential quality you need to be successful in politics is you
[Amit Varma]: have to other somebody, right? It is always anger, you know, hope will not get you words.
[Amit Varma]: And I see that happening. And my question to you, therefore, as an artist is this, that
[Amit Varma]: at one level as an artist, you want to embrace the individuals, the complexity of individuals
[Amit Varma]: and their particular circumstances and pay respect to that. So no character becomes a
[Amit Varma]: cliche, that no character, you don't essentialize a character ki yeh Muslim hai, yeh Dalit hai
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. They are complex characters, the characters you see in Masana, complex
[Amit Varma]: characters, you're dealing and engaging with that complexity. At the same time, there is
[Amit Varma]: also that urge to sort of reflect what is happening in the world around you. And Kundera,
[Amit Varma]: Milan Kundera once, you know, wrote an essay about how art and politics, there is this
[Amit Varma]: tension between them that they cannot mix. If you have too much politics in art, then
[Amit Varma]: it becomes propaganda. I mean, my words from what I remember, I don't know the exact words
[Amit Varma]: he wrote. So how does one strike this balance? Because at one level, I imagine that someone
[Amit Varma]: like you would be creating different arts 50 years ago or 200 years ago or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: because obviously your circumstances, the background, everything is different. So you
[Amit Varma]: might be telling the same kind of stories of individuals, but in a different backdrop.
[Amit Varma]: But how much does the backdrop affect it? And what is that balance that you then have
[Amit Varma]: to work?
[Guest]: So, yeah, that's a very, I would say, good question. Good is not the right word. That's
[Guest]: a very provocative question. Because I have thought about this a lot and a lot of questions
[Guest]: have come up. I mean, a lot of people have probably thought about how much politics should
[Guest]: come in art and how it should come. So, I believe that in today's date, especially,
[Guest]: the answers to this question might be different in every era or every decade. In this decade,
[Guest]: I feel that art should exist in itself with its truth. That is a big revolution in itself
[Guest]: right now. If you manage to say what you want to say, and even if it's a story which is
[Guest]: non-political, you know, in its, whatever, in its essence or first look, you feel that
[Guest]: it's completely non-political. That too should come with its full truth. That has always
[Guest]: been a challenge. But in today's time, that challenge is even bigger. Because, as I believe,
[Guest]: you know, the major fight is not between right wing and liberals or right wing and left wing
[Guest]: or, you know, or orthodoxy versus modernism. No, the fight right now is simply between
[Guest]: scientific temperament and lack of scientific temperament. And when you say scientific temperament,
[Guest]: in a story or in art, what that means, that simply means dedication to truth. What is
[Guest]: science in a very, you know, even etymologically, it's just a quest for truth and finding truth.
[Guest]: So, how will that truth come in art? That truth comes from authenticity. So, for me,
[Guest]: authenticity is its own aesthetic and the biggest aesthetic. Everything else is fine,
[Guest]: we think of 50 things, color palette or light or generally where to shoot and how, or any
[Guest]: art, I'm saying, any visual art I'm talking about. In visual art, authenticity is the
[Guest]: biggest aesthetic and to bring that authenticity, you have to fight against all kinds of non
[Guest]: or anti-science temperament at every stage. Right from when you are writing with your
[Guest]: own anti-scientific temperament part of your brain, which keeps telling you to not write
[Guest]: this or not, or you'll be, you know, no one will like this or no one will really approve
[Guest]: this because this is too, whatever, this is offensive to someone. Then when you start
[Guest]: pitching, so for bringing that art from that idea to the final marketplace, there are,
[Guest]: you have to deal with 10 different, at least 10 different bosses who have their own idea
[Guest]: of what art should be or what art should not be in today's times. So, this whole struggle
[Guest]: is ultimately of temperament, scientific temperament. Now, in between that, your question
[Guest]: fits in such a way that how much politics should come in art in today's time. People
[Guest]: have become very over, there were two terms during COVID, I forgot. One is specificity
[Guest]: and one is, the tests that used to be there, which are still going on, of course. So, one
[Guest]: is super specific, the antigen test and one is super, I mean there is one test which
[Guest]: will tell you, even if there is a small molecule in it, whether it is COVID or not. And there
[Guest]: is one test which will tell you how much it is. It won't tell you whether you have it
[Guest]: or not, but it tells you how much it is. So, right now, people have become super specific
[Guest]: about political affiliations. They, even to the extent, and it is being, whatever, it
[Guest]: is being, it is a project. It's not like it has happened by itself in people, but it
[Guest]: is a project where people now think that whoever we are buying vegetables from is a Hindu or
[Guest]: a Muslim, or whoever we are buying groceries from, or whoever we are listening to, which
[Guest]: side of the political spectrum they are on. At that time, if someone sees your politics
[Guest]: in the beginning itself, you are losing, no matter what side of, even if you are, you
[Guest]: know, even if you are making an agenda, propaganda piece and, you know, the government has given
[Guest]: you money to do their work. Even then, if it is seen in your work, then it is as an
[Guest]: artist you lose. As a businessman, maybe you will win and you will win a lot, but as an
[Guest]: artist, if that is truly your quest in life, you are losing. So, art, co-politics, art
[Guest]: mein politics, aaj ki tarikh mein bilkul nahi dikh sakta. There was a time when, probably
[Guest]: in the 50s and 60s, that was supposed to be a, you know, a value addition to your art.
[Guest]: If you were vocal about your politics through the art, right, from, you know, the poster
[Guest]: to the text, to the subtext, to the choice of actors, to the choice of music or whatever,
[Guest]: everything. Aaj mujhe lagta hai ki agar, kyuki yeh hi ek hissa bacha hai, aaj hi iklauti
[Guest]: cheez bachi hai, which can engage you even if you are on the other side of the spectrum,
[Guest]: in terms of political ideology. Aap op-ed, why the op-eds are dead, according to me,
[Guest]: or why the newspaper is dead itself, because it is now completely, whatever, marked by
[Guest]: people, ki yeh wo hai. Acha, scroll hum padhenge hi nahi. Scroll mein meri bhi tarikh likhi
[Guest]: hai. Mein nahi padhunga, kyuki main manta hi nahi, wo jo bhi likhte hai, wo sach hai.
[Guest]: Main manta hi nahi, wo kuch bhi ho. Agar wo simple scroll nahi yeh chhaap diya ki paani
[Guest]: ka chemical formula H2O hota hai, main nahi manunga, kyuki yeh scroll nahi likha hai,
[Guest]: wahan tak chali gayi yeh baat. Toh uss time mein, art iklauti cheez hai. Art mein, when
[Guest]: I say art, I mean storytelling, a narrative art form. It could be storytelling, it could
[Guest]: be comedy, it could be music of some sort. Jahan pe, on the face of it, people can't
[Guest]: really say ki yeh iss side hai, aur uss side hai. Thik hai, aapne, wahan tak baat ponch
[Guest]: gayi hai ki aapne logon ko bhi identify karna shuru kar diya hai, ki yeh aadmi hi aisa hai,
[Guest]: iski bhale hi yeh kuch bhi bol raha ho, main nahi sununga hai, bhale hi meri tarikh kar
[Guest]: hai. Lekin, uss time mein, it becomes even more important for an artist to tell stories
[Guest]: in a neutral way. Not be neutral, uss pe main second part pe aata hoon ki phir apni politics
[Guest]: ka hum kya karein, hum kahan leke jayein apni politics, agar hum apne art mein bhi nahi
[Guest]: bol sakte hain. But it is not just, not just a virtue of the artist right now to be neutral,
[Guest]: it is the necessity for an artist in these times to be neutral, to be treated without
[Guest]: doubt by whoever you are creating the art for, and I am creating my art for everyone,
[Guest]: and I don't really want, you know, to be bracketed or categorized into theek hai,
[Guest]: art dekhne ke baad aap jo bhi dekhenge, uske baad aapke andar jo bhi aate hain sawal wo
[Guest]: theek hai, uske saath aapko rehna hai, aur phir usmein aapko ho sakta hai gussa aaye
[Guest]: ki isne yeh kaise dikha diya hai, yeh kyun bola. But engage karna zaruri hai, aur wo
[Guest]: engagement ki power iss samein mere khyal se sirf art mein bachi hai, aur yahan tak ki
[Guest]: news mein bhi nahi bachi hai. News bhi ab itni zyada news which is supposed to be simply
[Guest]: stated facts is now seen as painted, you know, right wing, and this is again the world over.
[Guest]: America mein there is a very clear distinction between what is Fox News and what is CNN,
[Guest]: wo sab ke ek bracket hain, aur sabko pata hai, aur ussi tarah se wo, yahan bhi har cheez
[Guest]: ki tarah se bat gayi, aur yahan pe batwara jo hai wo bahut hi skewed sa hai, America jitna
[Guest]: balanced bhi nahi hai, ki theek hai aade log idhar hain, aade udhar hain, yahan to 80-90%
[Guest]: log ek tarah ka media dekh rahe hain, aur ek tarah ki cheeze consume kar rahe hain, aur
[Guest]: 10% hai jo apna koshish kar rahe hain ki unki baat koi sune. To uss time mein I feel aapko
[Guest]: aapki story bhale hi kitni political ho, it has to first appeal to the viewer or listener
[Guest]: as a story, as simply a human story of our times or of our people or something. Then
[Guest]: doosra sawal aata hai ki phir hum politics ka kya karein apni. To politics aap rakhe
[Guest]: hain, lekin usko agar aap top layer ya second layer ya third layer bhi apni kahaani mein
[Guest]: banayenge, to I think that is a failure of imagination. You have to actually need it
[Guest]: into your existence, into your personality, into your soul, into your craft, that it is
[Guest]: there but it is not there. It is there in every character you create, it is there in
[Guest]: every gesture you see on paper or on screen, but it's not ever distinguishable or kind
[Guest]: of stands out as its own. To ab jaise aat, kisi roti khao to imagine karna mushkil hai
[Guest]: na ki kahaan, jo mujhe meshaan bahut surprising lagta hai jab bhi mein chapati, roti khaata
[Guest]: ho ki yeh jo khet hum dekh rahein hain, train se aate jaate hain, uspe jo gehun lagi hai,
[Guest]: usse yeh cheez ban sakti hai aur kitni lambi journey rahi hai and we take it kind of for
[Guest]: granted ki theek hai humare saamne roti hai but it's such a huge journey and something
[Guest]: has taken so many forms and shapes and then it has been transported from some village
[Guest]: in Madhya Pradesh to Bombay, then usko humne piswaaya hai, phir humne usme paani milaaya
[Guest]: hai aur phir usko bahut achche se guntha hai, phir usko phula diya hai. There is so much
[Guest]: science and there is so much economy and there is so much, I would say, society in just that
[Guest]: ek chapati. Ab aap chapati mein dhoondein ki uska mitti kahaan hai ya wo paani kahaan
[Guest]: hai ya wo pesticide kahaan hai. It's all there. It's all there. That's why you are able to
[Guest]: eat that thing and feel nourished but it's not really visible there. It is there. So
[Guest]: utna zyada you have to basically first get if you want, if you think you have a politics
[Guest]: and everyone has their politics even if they don't know it and in fact my friend Sanjay
[Guest]: says in our show Aise Taise Democracy ki if you don't choose your politics, your politics
[Guest]: will choose you at some point. So ultimately politics toh hai aapki. Toh agar hai toh then
[Guest]: be aware of what it is and then be so aware that you put it in your work but not put it
[Guest]: in your work, put it just in your whole personality that it automatically is there. If you try
[Guest]: to write a story and then say achha iski politics kuch kar dete hain, ispe na ab ye kar dete
[Guest]: hain ki iski politics aise kar dete hain ki liberal ho jaye ya right wing ho jaye, kuch
[Guest]: bhi ho jaye then that's basically like the worst thing you can do to your art. Usse achcha
[Guest]: hai ki aap chhod do, log khud samajh lenge kya politics and maybe it is flawed, maybe
[Guest]: it is you know you're not aware of and better that is still a slightly better approach than
[Guest]: like actually doing it in a very holistic manner.
[Amit Varma]: That you know what you mentioned about Sanjay saying reminds me of that old quote that where
[Amit Varma]: you stand depends on where you sit. So often we are just so much shaped by our circumstances
[Amit Varma]: without even realizing it and I make a similar point about writing to my writing students
[Amit Varma]: where I say that every piece is essentially a collection of choices and those choices
[Amit Varma]: are affecting the reader in some way. Now you can either make all those choices yourself
[Amit Varma]: and be intentional about it or they are just random things that have tumbled out of your
[Amit Varma]: head and you're not in control. So you want to be in control but it is not that you know
[Amit Varma]: by ignoring it that it the effects they have goes away and by the way that the roti thing
[Amit Varma]: reminds me of an essay called I pencil by Leonard Reed. Have you read it? No. So I pencil
[Amit Varma]: is this great sort of essay which talks about spontaneous order or how markets make things
[Amit Varma]: happen without one central planner. So the point is it's from the first person account
[Amit Varma]: of a pencil and all the different parts of a pencil coming from some 40-50 countries
[Amit Varma]: and it's not like there is one master central planner who is deciding it. Just everyone
[Amit Varma]: acts on their own individual incentives and magically without realizing it you have a
[Unknown]: pencil and I think that was updated a few years ago where someone spoke of the iPhone
[Amit Varma]: like that. How many different countries it comes from and I thought if maybe if Manikol
[Amit Varma]: Ji was alive today instead of uski roti he would make meri roti and kind of do something.
[Amit Varma]: No your point about politics and art is also I thought illustrated beautifully by something
[Amit Varma]: like Masaan for example where the politics is invisible but at the same time you have
[Amit Varma]: a Dalit character you are rooting for and a woman fighting oppression who you are rooting
[Amit Varma]: for and you are rooting for these people and nothing is overt there is no bhasan bazi but
[Amit Varma]: the very fact that readers who are not these people are rooting for them I think makes
[Amit Varma]: a difference and my other thread which I want to go to which I keep coming back to during
[Amit Varma]: the show is sort of the difference between the concrete and the abstract. Like I think
[Amit Varma]: many of the things that tear our society apart are abstract notions like nationalism or purity
[Amit Varma]: or race or caste or whatever and in the concrete we don't always act upon them. You know so
[Amit Varma]: there is a common joke that a bigot will say oh I have a few Muslim friends but the irony
[Amit Varma]: is he probably does and he is probably nice to them because in the concrete he has no
[Amit Varma]: objection. It is those abstract conceptions that are the poison and that is where the
[Amit Varma]: toxicity comes from and most of the time the worlds that we live in especially people who
[Amit Varma]: are alive today is we are living more and more in an abstract world because even if
[Amit Varma]: you are sitting with friends we are both looking into our smartphone if you are in a cafe together
[Amit Varma]: right we are not talking to each other we are in this abstract world that is coming
[Amit Varma]: to us from the smartphone instead of you know the flesh and blood person in front of us
[Amit Varma]: and this is dangerous and I think one way in which the only way to really fight this
[Amit Varma]: is to embrace the concrete a bit more and that is also what art does you know that is
[Amit Varma]: what a good film or a good book or will do by putting you in somebody's head and making
[Amit Varma]: them feel the way they do so that the other is no longer the other at least for that sort
[Amit Varma]: of point in time. So I am just thinking a lot taking off from what you said because
[Amit Varma]: I completely agree with that it kind of irritates me when the politics is overt because I think
[Amit Varma]: it is most powerful when it does not need to be overt. Yeah though at the same time
[Guest]: I understand in some cases representation is needed for people to feel empowered. So
[Guest]: for example let's say Paranjeet or Nagraj Manjule when they make film about you know
[Guest]: Dalit characters and characters who are oppressed and who are in the course of the film also
[Guest]: face you know extreme violence because of their identity. So in yes in certain films
[Guest]: and in certain cases yes that is required for people just to feel okay seen and feel
[Guest]: that relatability and that anger is also needed. So yeah there are those kind of films but
[Guest]: my point is mostly from from that position of privilege also but your position of an
[Guest]: artist who is trying to yeah trying to make bridges in a way trying to reach across. So
[Guest]: there are of course there are films that are just that just want you to feel seen and feel
[Guest]: empowered about that okay this is my story this is my people who are kind of representing
[Guest]: my anger against the system or against the oppressors and okay that is one kind of film
[Guest]: but for me probably because I don't have that you know that natural anger. I don't have
[Guest]: that having many reasons for that natural anger. So for me the job of an artist from
[Guest]: yeah from a privileged community in this case Savarna Hindu male the job is to make bridges
[Guest]: the job is to bring narratives which otherwise you won't see to see and to not feel like
[Guest]: okay I'm I'm watching a political statement I'm watching a story and that story then starts
[Guest]: living inside me which is exactly what happens with comedy also. So what comedy does I feel
[Guest]: is it brings a very almost what evolution has given us this response to shocking things
[Guest]: it's either laughter or you know or some kind of it is a sensory response and it is something
[Guest]: you can't control. So for example in some of our shows though most of the people know
[Guest]: what kind of show it is when they come to see me or see democracy on stage but still
[Guest]: there are sometimes these 20-30% people who show up either because their friends have
[Guest]: dragged them sometimes a lot of times it happens that people who live in America or UK and
[Guest]: they send their parents to our shows like so these probably 30-year-old 40-year-olds
[Guest]: they send their parents to our shows ticket le dete hain abhi parents ke aisaab se haan
[Guest]: 500 rupee ka ticket liya hai to waste to nahi jaana chahiye to jao and they end up in our
[Guest]: shows and then they discover that okay we are being very very political on stage but
[Guest]: the thing then the advantage with comedy in comedy you can be directly political but you
[Guest]: have a punchline and the thing is it's always a surprising punchline that is the point of
[Guest]: the punchline it has to surprise you and the moment you are surprised you let down your
[Guest]: guard because there is that emotion has kind of overtaken you it is either shock or surprise
[Guest]: or sometimes the awe at the cleverness of the joke or something and you let your guard
[Guest]: down and in that moment and then everyone around because as I said 70% people are already
[Guest]: you know we are speaking to the choir kind of a thing and woh toh haste hain toh ek aur
[Guest]: jo doosra natural response hai human human behavior ka which is you want to belong you
[Guest]: always want to belong that's the core of religion and core of nationalism and everything and
[Guest]: they want to belong in that room they start laughing and once you start laughing you kind
[Guest]: of reduce the stature of these you know sacred figures you have ideas sometimes and sometimes
[Guest]: it's people sometimes it's ideas sometimes it's certain incidents you can't really talk
[Guest]: about that's what they have grown up with and they allow that so again so as artists
[Guest]: I think our job is to create that bridge okay they may go back home and still never you know
[Guest]: buy a ticket for our show again if they have a choice but thoda sa unke dimaag mein apne
[Guest]: jo bhi sacred figures hai unki value thodi si kum ho gayi hai ki okay has sakte hain aur
[Guest]: aisi koi buri baat nahi hai so that is what I think similarly the same thing we can do
[Guest]: through cinema where you talk about certain things and you bring the kind of stories or
[Guest]: the kind of dilemmas these people are facing the characters in the story to them and kabhi
[Guest]: unhone ye socha nahi tha ki ye possible hai ki achha aisi bhi ek zindagi hoti hai aur wo
[Guest]: zindagi jab aapne dekh li hai toh bhale hi aap us zindagi ya us tare ke insaan se aap
[Guest]: nafrat karte hunge aapke dimaag mein bachpan se bataya gaya hai ki theek hai there is a
[Guest]: certain you know caste or there are certain castes you can't interact with but you have
[Guest]: interacted on screen you have interacted with that and with that person from that caste
[Guest]: which you think is is really below your social standards and in for those 90 minutes you
[Guest]: were actually as you said you would you are rooting for for the characters without really
[Guest]: thinking about you know how you will behave with that character in real life and you meet
[Guest]: them because then you will start identifying them for various tags you have given them
[Guest]: to ultimately so in both the cases it is about asking people or kind of inviting people to
[Guest]: lower their guards and and in some cases like in comedy almost forcing people to let down
[Guest]: their guards and they do a lot of them and of course there are they have been cases they
[Guest]: didn't and they kind of let it out because that shock or surprise or or whatever has
[Guest]: to go somewhere so sometimes people kind of heckles that's why they heckle because they
[Guest]: can't control this emotion they are dealing with it in that moment where people around
[Guest]: them are laughing and they also want to laugh but their upbringing has told them it's not
[Guest]: okay to laugh at this kind of a joke and so they don't know what to do with that that
[Guest]: unresolved emotion at that time so they heckle and not just heckle they abuse and they sometimes
[Guest]: we have met people at random places who kind of are really angry and want to just show
[Guest]: that they are angry through whatever you know violent means they have chosen in that moment
[Amit Varma]: so my sense of social media and tell me if I'm if you don't agree is that for all the
[Amit Varma]: toxicity on Twitter and everywhere all the noise really comes from vocal minorities right
[Amit Varma]: there are a few people who have chosen their tribe they'll make a lot of noise to signal
[Amit Varma]: you know their virtue to their tribe and raise their status within the tribe and these are
[Amit Varma]: tribes on all sides obviously but I believe that most people are like the silent majority
[Amit Varma]: which is not saying anything because why get mobbed why get shouted down why get into this
[Amit Varma]: shit but who are open to different points of view like when I do my writing class when
[Amit Varma]: I tell people about writing opinion pieces what I always say is you always have to state
[Amit Varma]: your opinion clearly but also take the strongest argument from the other side and state why
[Amit Varma]: you disagree and one reason is of course that is an intellectually honest way to think about
[Amit Varma]: anything but the other reason is that then the reader knows that if you're in the silent
[Amit Varma]: majority the reader knows that this guy is not partisan she's not preaching to the choir
[Amit Varma]: you know that I can trust her and that's important but but from what you're saying it almost
[Amit Varma]: seems as if that it's it's not so much a silent majority but like you said
[Amit Varma]: that scroll
[Amit Varma]: but I would say that most people are actually kind of open to both they'll just go in whatever
[Amit Varma]: this thing it's only these vocal minorities which have said that oh scroll is all left-wing
[Amit Varma]: commies and so and so is whatever so what's would you agree or yeah but they are the leaders
[Guest]: so the vocal people and they are always they are the natural reader leaders that's why
[Guest]: they are you know so vocal so fearlessly and all right now what is happening and probably
[Guest]: what was always happening is the state always acts as as the father of this joint family
[Guest]: and they choose to ask I mean all these things basically this patriarch of the family is
[Guest]: deciding now and which has always been the case is there are these local enforcers of
[Guest]: this patriarch and at some point the enforcers try to put stuff which they believe in and
[Guest]: they don't even need to take approval from the patriarch and which is what is happening
[Guest]: right now in on on most of the social media where there are people who are of course who
[Guest]: know that they won't be reprimanded or stopped by by the bosses to do whatever they want
[Guest]: to do so they can you know announce on on social media okay this person has said this
[Guest]: particular thing which is really offensive and that's it and now just go and you know
[Guest]: abuse them or file cases against them or whatever the multiple ways of destroying their lives
[Guest]: so they are getting power from both sides from above from where no one is stopping them
[Guest]: and from whom they are speaking because they are getting the response so that silent majority
[Guest]: thing I don't really think that's a thing anymore there is no silent majority they are
[Guest]: all vocal in whatever sometimes vocal in their silence also or their you know vocal in their
[Guest]: in their choices that they still they may not abuse but they are supporting the people
[Guest]: who are or they are having completely normal relations with people who are calling for
[Guest]: you know all kinds of violent crimes against people who are who don't believe or who don't
[Guest]: agree with them so I don't think that silent majority of concept
[Guest]: I don't know is it a saving grace or not but yeah this yeah still it is probably a saving
[Guest]: grace that a lot of these people who are listening to this vocal angry group would probably be
[Guest]: doing their normal life stuff if they were not you know they won't really take the lead
[Guest]: so that's the only probably saving grace they won't take the lead they will someday they
[Guest]: are very happy to be part of the mob and if there is a leader telling them what to do
[Guest]: they will happily do it but without a leader they'll probably be lost or they'll probably
[Guest]: go back to okay finding finding whatever better jobs better life whatever and for now they
[Guest]: have been told this is the better life where you have to be angry and they are doing that
[Amit Varma]: so there's a theory behind mob violence or lynchings which kind of also speaks to this
[Amit Varma]: which is the theory is that everyone has a threshold at which they start hitting someone
[Amit Varma]: so I might have the threshold that I don't mind being the first person to hit someone
[Amit Varma]: somebody else will only hit if he sees 10 people hit somebody else will only jump in
[Amit Varma]: if he sees 100 people hit so everybody has a threshold and what you're kind of saying
[Amit Varma]: is that the people who seem to be the silent majority are just people whose threshold hasn't
[Guest]: been reached but it can happen anytime yeah and yeah so there could be probably yeah you
[Guest]: are right that there will be some or more if there are 1000 people then it is possible
[Guest]: that out of that there are 700 who have a threshold that if 100 people hit then I'll
[Guest]: hit and there are 100 who have a threshold that if 10 people hit then I'll hit and the
[Guest]: rest are 100 who have no threshold there are some who are about to start so yes so that
[Guest]: is absolutely true and I read that piece that theory about the mob violence and how it kind
[Guest]: of takes place the science of it or how I think they used the term chaos theory also
[Amit Varma]: in it and it kind of yeah it makes sense it makes you lose faith in the human race because
[Amit Varma]: then where is a hope let's take a quick commercial break and then we'll come back and we'll get
[Amit Varma]: to biography which is normally what I start with but we'll finally get to it
[Amit Varma]: have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it well I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you since April 2020 I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course the art of clear
[Amit Varma]: writing an online community has now sprung up of all my past students we have workshops
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction in the course
[Amit Varma]: itself through four webinars spread over four weekends I share all I know about the craft
[Amit Varma]: and practice of clear writing there are many exercises much interaction a lovely and lively
[Amit Varma]: community at the end of it the course cost rupees 10,000 plus GST or about 150 dollars
[Amit Varma]: and is a monthly thing so if you're interested head on over to register at indiancut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing that's indiancut.com slash clear writing being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God-given talent just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills I can help you
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Varun Grover about his life
[Amit Varma]: his work and so on and now finally after the break we've sort of reached the start of his
[Amit Varma]: life tell me sort of about your childhood you were like born in Sundarnagar in HP what
[Amit Varma]: was that like what were your growing up years like and what language did you speak at home
[Amit Varma]: what kind of books did you read what kind of entertainment did you consume
[Guest]: so now we've come to the easy part
[Guest]: in the beginning we were talking about the big achievements of the big people
[Guest]: which make us feel very small but I was born in Sundarnagar so my father is the first
[Guest]: in his family to go to college my grandfather was a street painter he used to do sign board
[Guest]: painting and his two elder sons my father is the youngest of the three sons and so those
[Guest]: two elder sons also went into the same painting business sign board painting and all sign
[Guest]: board painting interestingly is the first kind of ad agency job in a way post-independence
[Guest]: India at that time if you see you had to do local advertising you were not even given
[Guest]: graphics sometimes someone used to come and say we have a sweet shop and we have to do
[Guest]: this kind of thing so you are an artist you are creating you are basically doing everything
[Guest]: the departments of an ad agency from client servicing to creative director to copywriter
[Guest]: to graphics you do all the work so they were doing it at that time right after independence
[Guest]: they moved from Pakistan to this place in Haryana called Jagadri which is now Yamuna Nagar and
[Guest]: Jagadri if there are two districts next to each other, so at that time he was in Yamuna
[Guest]: Nagar but it was a part of the Jagadri district, Yamuna Nagar was a town and they moved from
[Guest]: Lyalpur in Pakistan post partition Punjabi family so this was going on on my father's
[Guest]: side where my father saw painting from childhood and my father has also learned painting a
[Guest]: lot from my father and while doing that the work of making film posters also started coming
[Guest]: to him because a local theater was opened single screen so because of film posters three
[Guest]: brothers got interested in films so my father was always a big fan of cinema right from
[Guest]: probably he was 12 or something when his two elder brothers were handling the work of painting
[Guest]: and because he was the youngest, it was decided in the house that let him study, work is going
[Guest]: on, business whatever is going on, family business, so my father was sent to college
[Guest]: school, he used to study well, went to college, did his diploma in engineering from Chandigarh
[Guest]: Punjab University which later I think became Punjab Engineering College from where he did
[Guest]: diploma which was later, because at that time diploma was only there in 50s or 60s, B.Tech
[Guest]: was not that much, so later it was considered equivalent to B.Tech so he is kind of, he
[Guest]: is an engineer in mechanical, I think production was, it was called production engineering
[Guest]: at that time, so from there he worked in 2-3 places in press and in many places where there
[Guest]: was machinery, he worked there, after that he got a job in Himachal, there was a place
[Guest]: called Sundarnagar where we used to live, but that job was in Salapad, Salapad Mandi
[Guest]: which is the district of Himachal, there was this hydel electric plant being made which
[Guest]: I think was Himachal's first dam project, this was late 70s, and there he got a job
[Guest]: as junior engineer, so he was there, then he got married to my mom and I was born there
[Guest]: in 1980, so from childhood at home, because papa was very fond of films, still is, he
[Guest]: knows more gossips than me, still he shows many things, his trailer has come, I didn't
[Guest]: know that, his trailer has come, generally I am very clued in, I am still a very pop
[Guest]: culture enthusiast, so childhood, we lived in Sundarnagar for 6 years, then from there
[Guest]: the dam project was completed, then he got posting into military engineering services,
[Guest]: so we came to Dehradun, so I remember the first 6 years very vaguely, I just remember
[Guest]: that we were in Sundarnagar, there was only one theatre, we used to go there to watch
[Guest]: films, and I remember the first film also, we watched Nikah, I mean I remember it in
[Guest]: my memory, maybe I have seen it before, but I remember Nikah and Masoom, there were two
[Guest]: films that we had seen in theatre at that time, and then from childhood, not only films,
[Guest]: but also music, books, my father is a big reader, he is very fond of reading, since
[Guest]: childhood I have seen that he used to come home in the evening and pick up a book or
[Guest]: a newspaper, he used to read newspaper a lot, I mean he has a habit of reading newspapers,
[Guest]: till now it is Sunday, so on Sunday he will bring 3-4 newspapers and then he will read
[Guest]: it for the next 3-4 days, so because of that, I got a lot of books at home since childhood,
[Guest]: and the specific books for children that used to come at that time, there was Parag, there
[Guest]: was Nandan, there was Baal Hans, which was probably the most literary of all the magazines
[Guest]: for children at that time, because Champak and Nandan, and Chanda Mama, and Suman Saurabh,
[Guest]: and Nanna Samrat, these were all typical Disney ideas of children, that children are cute
[Guest]: and they want cute stories, or they want interesting stories, or they want mythological stories,
[Guest]: I don't know who had put this idea at that time, which is still there in India, I think
[Guest]: Chota Bheem is one of the most popular animation series, but there were a lot of books, and
[Guest]: in that Baal Hans was a little more mature, there was a little more scientific temperament
[Guest]: and the stories were not so cute and simplistic, so all these books, I think I remember from
[Guest]: childhood, from the time I started reading, I mean from the age of 4-5 years, when you
[Guest]: add words and sentences from A-B-C-D and make a sentence and read it, since then I have
[Guest]: been fond of reading, and maybe because I got the material to read, so from Himachal
[Guest]: we came to Dehradun, we came to Dehradun, where actually I started reading probably
[Guest]: more seriously, because from the age of 7 to the age of 12, I stayed in Dehradun,
[Guest]: from 1986 to 1992, and during that time I got fond of writing, not just reading, because
[Guest]: I think everyone learns like that, I don't know, I think so, but if you read a lot,
[Guest]: then you want to show off that I read this, and there are 2-3 ways to show off, either
[Guest]: you tell someone that I read this, or you write and confirm that I have learned a new
[Guest]: word and I will write it now, so in your usage, you kind of make it your own, with your own
[Guest]: usage, so I started doing such things at the same time, at the age of 8-9 years, I kept
[Guest]: writing something small, because there were so many books and magazines, and stories
[Guest]: were seen in them, so it was understood that someone is writing, and writing is a cool
[Guest]: thing, it was in my mind since then, that the people who write, they are such great people
[Guest]: that we wait for a new edition every month, it was a very exciting time, 4-5 days in the
[Guest]: beginning of the month, when it used to come, when all the magazines, their monthly edition
[Guest]: used to come to a nearby book store, and we used to go there and pick it, it was a very
[Guest]: exciting time and it was something which developed in me an idea that this is a very valuable
[Guest]: thing, this thrill, this adventure of turning a page and reading and discovering a new story
[Guest]: at the same time, it is a very good association, generally the memory association, because
[Guest]: of which our whole life, I mean, there are many things that become a bad association,
[Guest]: because of which you are not able to learn swimming all your life, sometimes or sometimes
[Guest]: you are not able to go to a particular place, so for me that association is very beautiful
[Guest]: since then, and then at the age of 10, I wrote a story, because there was a story in Balhans,
[Guest]: Chuchu went away, or Chuchu went away, something like that was his name, it was about a child
[Guest]: who gets a baby bird, injured on the road, and he takes care of it for a few days, a good
[Guest]: relationship is formed between the two, and finally when the baby bird recovers, it flies
[Guest]: away, so this story ends here, now for a 10-year-old child, it was a very tragic tale, and generally
[Guest]: what, why I am saying, and why I was saying that Balhans was different from other books
[Guest]: that it had a sad ending story like this, which I think Champak or any other magazine
[Guest]: would never dare, that in a book of small children, there is a story with a sad kind
[Guest]: of an ending, you develop a beautiful relationship and then the bird flies away, so I was worried
[Guest]: for many days after reading that story, and I felt very bad that why this relationship
[Guest]: did not continue, such a good relationship of a child and a bird, and then I, one day
[Guest]: I had a fever, so I did not go to school, and my mother also used to teach in a school,
[Guest]: so she went to school, my father also went to school, my younger brother also went to
[Guest]: school, I was alone at home, they gave me medicine, it was the days of winters in the
[Guest]: sun, outside in the sun, folding, a nylon bed used to come, they sat on it and left,
[Guest]: I was sitting, then I felt that something should be done about this story, I am not
[Guest]: going to take it lying down, so I wrote a sequel to that story, in which after a few
[Guest]: years, the same bird was found again and then a relationship was formed between the two
[Guest]: and this time it was a more, whatever in my ideal world, it was like, okay, we won't
[Guest]: cage the bird, but the bird will come back on its own every day just to say hello, so
[Guest]: the bird is free, but it keeps coming to that boy every day, so I wrote something like this
[Guest]: and then my parents read that thing and they said that it is good, we can send it, let's
[Guest]: see what happens, and we sent it to Balhant and Balhant published it, and that was kind
[Guest]: of a major confidence booster, at the age of 10, you write something for a magazine,
[Guest]: you are completely in love with, and they published it and they also sent 50 rupees
[Guest]: ka Parishramik, jo uss samay mila 50 rupee, jo bahut badi rakam thi, 1990 mein 50 rupee,
[Guest]: matlab wo bhi uss samay, we are talking about pre Narsimha Rao, pre Manmohan Singh time,
[Guest]: Indian economy was really going through a bad time, 50 rupee ek bachche ko aapne de
[Guest]: diye the, toh mera pehli kamayi bhi thi zindagi ki, and it kind of, that, I believe it kind
[Guest]: of opened a door that, that was the first time I thought, okay, I'll be a writer someday,
[Guest]: ki paise bhi milte hain, chhapta bhi hain, aur aap kuch karte hain, aur uski tarif bhi
[Guest]: karte hai, aur toh waha se phir mene seriously, seriously matlab uss aim ke saath ki chhapana
[Guest]: hai, chhapna chahiye, uss tarah se likhna hai, toh agle kuch saalon mein phir aur kuch
[Guest]: ek doh poetry meri chhapi Baalhans mein, phir school ke liye, magazine ke liye, I started
[Guest]: writing, aur school me bhi, class me bhi generally just to show off ki mene yeh seekha hai, ab
[Guest]: main yeh likhunga aur us tarah ka, and toh woh ek waha se woh chalna shuru hua, toh
[Guest]: ek taraf kitabe thi, doosri taraf music tha, again my father's influence, unko filme bohot
[Guest]: pasand hain, toh filmon ke saath saath music ka bohot daada shock hai, humare ghar mein
[Guest]: kabhi bhi audio cassettes ki kami nahi rahi uss samay, jo bhi naya, kuch bhi classics
[Guest]: se lekar, the recent TV shows like Mirza Ghalib ka jab audio cassette aaya, so woh jaise
[Guest]: aaya hoga market mein humare ghar aaya gaya tha, Kabhi Sammilan aur theatre ka bohot daada
[Guest]: shock tha papa ko, toh hum log woh bhi dekhne jaate the Dehradun mein jahan bhi hota tha,
[Guest]: and again, so all of these activities kind of created a world for me which was within
[Guest]: reach, ki theek hai yeh sab aap kar sakte hain, and all of this is a professional whatever
[Guest]: path you can take, hum theatre, Dehradun mein ek annual theatre festival hota tha, waha
[Guest]: uss tarah se koi venue nahi tha jaisa Bombay mein yaar Delhi mein hote hain, ki har hafte
[Guest]: aap dekh sakte hain, but waha ek annual theatre festival hota tha, jo kaafi well funded tha
[Guest]: it seems, kyuki bade bade theatre groups aate the Delhi se, Bombay se, there were some TV
[Guest]: actors we had seen from that time, ki Doordarshan mein inka show aata hai, yeh yaah pe perform
[Guest]: kar rahe hain humare saamne, so woh poora hafta humare liye bohot thrilling hota tha, kyuki
[Guest]: poora hafte hum log, har roz humko theatre jaane ko milta tha, har roz hum log ek nahi
[Guest]: kahani dekhte the, lot of these stories were completely not suitable for kids of that age,
[Guest]: aur suitable hongi bhi toh ya pata nahi, but samajh ke pare thi, like plays like Mahabhoj
[Guest]: and plays like, which is a very political and very, I would say complicated for a 10
[Guest]: year old to understand or comprehend ki kya ho raha hai, par uss tarah ke bohot saare,
[Guest]: ek Teen Tappar naam se play aaya tha, which was again about, I think vaguely I remember
[Guest]: which was about the fight of a slum, people living in a slum with some, you know, builder
[Guest]: trying to evacuate them and all, but just the, and that's again, that's the thing with
[Guest]: art and that's the thing with good art or powerful art, it finds a way to justify itself
[Guest]: to people, even if you don't understand it, like mujhe kya samajh aaya hoga 8 saal ki
[Guest]: umar mein jo political kavee samelan ho raha the, wahan pe, haas se kavee samelan ho raha
[Guest]: the, uss mein kya samajh aaya hoga ki ye jo Rajiv Gandhi pe satire hai, ya LK Advani
[Guest]: pe satire hai, ya Ram Jethmalani pe satire hai, there was, but there was a poem where
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi is complaining to Indira Gandhi about Ram Jethmalani, teasing him, something
[Guest]: like that, there was those, ya Vin Chaddha, ye sab naam mene wahan sune jo mujhe kuch
[Guest]: nahi pata tha, main 9 saal ka, 89 ki baat hai ye, aur ek bahut bada kavee samelan hua
[Guest]: tha, jismein sab uss samay ke saare jo star kavee the Ashok Chakradhar and Sharad Joshi
[Guest]: and Surendra Sharma, Hullad Muradabadi, Kaka Hathrasi, Arun Jaimini, lot of these like
[Guest]: big, big and very political poets of those times and it was the time of VP Singh, Jobi,
[Guest]: I think VP Singh was the PM at that time when this happened and they're talking about really
[Guest]: strong political ideas through whatever, through their satire and I was dazzled by it.
[Guest]: Mujhe aadi cheezein nahi samajh aa rahi hongi, bas tukbandi samajh aa rahi hongi kahin kahin
[Guest]: ya, kahin kahin koi punchline samajh aa gaye hongi toh aa gaye hongi, but wo itni badi
[Guest]: cheeze thi Dehradun mein ki uske baad uske cassette, market mein jab aaye, audio cassette,
[Guest]: wo itne zyada bikhe aur itne mehenge the and still we, my father spent money to buy those
[Guest]: I think 3 or 4 cassette pack kyuki wo 6 ghante ka program tha total aur wo cassette phir
[Guest]: hum log baad mein bhot sunte rahe, isliye mujhe bahut saari kavitae uski yaad hain ki
[Guest]: Sharad Joshi ne kya sunaya tha aur Hullad Muradabadi ne kya sunaya tha.
[Guest]: Toh waha se yeh doosra influence aaya, kavi sammilan ka, teesra influence aaya poetry
[Guest]: ka which again mostly because of what Doordarshan was doing at that time with Mirza Ghalib
[Guest]: aur with Kaikasha kind of shows which was every episode was about one great Urdu poet
[Guest]: toh usmein koi episode tha jo mere khayal se Mir pe tha, koi episode tha jo Daag Dhelvi
[Guest]: pe tha, aise alag alag episode, har episode mein ek kisi shayar ki kahani aati thi unka
[Guest]: almost biopic types, ek hai do episode ka, so uske phir audio cassette aati the, ab
[Guest]: wo papa sunte the, Mirza Ghalib sunte the, ya Kaikasha sunte the, ya baaki aur Jagjit
[Guest]: Singh ke bhot saari albums aati the.
[Guest]: Main wo sunta tha toh mere liye again how art works, music works, no matter you understand
[Guest]: it or not.
[Guest]: Ek bhi shabd aapko nahi samajh aa raha hai, theek hai, aapko music toh samajhne ki zaroor
[Guest]: nahi, aap usmein bhaya jaate hain.
[Guest]: Jab aap bhaya jaate hain toh phir aap samajhna chahte hain ki achha ismein yeh shabd kya
[Guest]: hai, toh phir maine thoda pehle sunke samajhna shuru kya ki Mirza Ghalib, jo Jagjit Singh
[Guest]: ga rahe hain, wo kya ga rahe hain ki, nikalna khuld se aadam ka sunte aaye hain, lekin
[Guest]: khuld kya hota hai, aadam kya hota hai, bahut beyaabroo hokar tere kooche se hum nikle
[Guest]: toh beyaabroo kya hota hai, jo sabse aasaan nahi is poore share mein, shayad samajhne
[Guest]: ki cheez hai, beyaabroo hai, but wo bhi usmein toh nahi pata thi.
[Guest]: Toh phir dekha ki papa ke book rack mein rakhi hui hai, Mirza Ghalib ka Diwan-e-Ghalib
[Guest]: ka translation, translation malabhi Hindi jo bhi explanation.
[Guest]: It was not translation, it was I think Ali Sardar Jafri ki kitab thi, jo ki where he
[Guest]: kind of writes about each share and gives a bit of context also and all that.
[Guest]: Toh usmein word meanings bhi the, toh wo kitab utha li, das saal ki umr mein shayad.
[Guest]: Toh waha se acha samajh aaye, khuld kya hota hai, yaar Ghalib kis daur mein raha tha aur
[Guest]: phir uske us daur ke complications kya thi aur waha ki language kya thi, aur usmein Turkish
[Guest]: bhi hai aur usmein Persian bhi hai aur usmein Hindi-Urdu toh hai hi.
[Guest]: Toh wo saari cheezein achanak se it was like, I would say in spite of it being a very generally
[Guest]: probably many middle class families were like that.
[Guest]: But for me it was a very rich world and it was a world full of possibilities in terms
[Guest]: of the literary and artistic scope of it.
[Guest]: Toh wo saari cheezein jab das saal ki umr mein wo chippak gayi toh phir wo chhuti nahi.
[Guest]: Phir wo uske baad we moved to Lucknow when I was 12 and Lucknow is even richer in terms
[Guest]: of its history and accessibility to various arts and crafts and books.
[Guest]: Toh hum Lucknow paunche toh waha pe aur zyada waha theatre aur zyada regularly hota tha
[Guest]: waha kitabe aur milti thi.
[Guest]: Waha pe ek bhasha jo mein tab tak nahi bolta tha.
[Guest]: Kyunki jab tak hum Sundarnagar mein the tab tak mein Punjabi bolta tha.
[Guest]: Phir Dehradun aaya waha bhi Punjabi-Hindi mix chalta raha.
[Guest]: Punjabi bhi ghar pe bolta tha aur Punjabi accent mera kaafi heavy tha.
[Guest]: Phir jab Lucknow aaya toh waha pe Lucknow wale kyunki apni zabaan ko lekar bahut snobbish
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: Toh waha pe phir logon ne mujhe zalil karna shuru kiya ki tum itni Punjabi type football
[Guest]: kyun bolte ho.
[Guest]: Football hota hai.
[Guest]: Angrezi shabd bhi Lucknow mein matlub tha ki haan theek hai angrezi hai lekin football
[Guest]: toh ekdami galat hai.
[Guest]: Toh mere English teacher the wo bhi mujhe he started teasing me in class ki yeh teri
[Guest]: angrezi bahut Punjabi accent wali hai.
[Guest]: Toh unhone mujhe kuch challenge, challenge unhone nahi diya tha, unhone kuch mazaak banaya
[Guest]: tha class mein toh maine kuch khade ho kar bola ki nahi sir main suna sakta ho yeh poem.
[Guest]: Koi choti se poem thi jo unhone ka ki tujhe toh kya hi yaad hogi.
[Guest]: Kuch bhool gaya ho kaunsi thi.
[Guest]: There was one again kyunki haan poetry, angrezi poetry mujhe kabhi samajh nahi aayi.
[Guest]: Bilkul matlub wo aisa hota hai ki takra ke nikal jati hai.
[Guest]: But uss samay kuch tha, kuch hui baat toh maine kaha ki nahi main yaad karke aunga kal.
[Guest]: Yeh toh choti se yeh art line ki hai, yeh yaad karlega toh kaunsi badi baat hogi.
[Guest]: So then I went back and I memorized The Sailor and the Albatross, Samuel Taylor Coleridge
[Guest]: ki jo bahut badi poem hai.
[Guest]: Uska bhi I think abridged version hi tha humare kitab mein, humare textbook mein.
[Guest]: But it was still like probably 10-12 pages of poetry which I memorized and I kind of recited
[Guest]: it in class and then aur uske dauraan mera, kyunki wo it almost became an exercise for
[Guest]: me to neutralize my Punjabi accent because it was a big thing in school.
[Guest]: Mere Hindi, Angrezi dono teacher mujhe kaafi sunaate the.
[Guest]: Aur baaki dost bhi sunaate the.
[Guest]: Dost is probably a bit of a euphemism, but they were like classmates.
[Guest]: Jo kaafi zyada bullying hoti thi shuruaat mein because I was an obese kid at that time.
[Guest]: And slightly fair-skinned in terms of skin tone and having a completely different dialect
[Guest]: or tone quality to the voice.
[Guest]: To us sab ke beech mein I was very otherized in the school and kaafi bullying hoti thi.
[Guest]: Us sab ke beech mein I had to find a way to prove myself and I thought okay language is
[Guest]: something which I like.
[Guest]: I like text.
[Guest]: I like language.
[Guest]: To waha pe phir mujhe again I picked up this as a challenge ki main class ko impress karunga.
[Guest]: To phir maine phir se poetry likhna aur Angrezi mein poetry likhna shuru kar diya.
[Guest]: Bahut kharab thi abhi bhi ek diary mujhe mili kuch din pehle us time ki aur bahut thi kharab
[Guest]: thi but it was still poetry in terms of rhyme tha usmein kuch thought tha jo koi aur nahi
[Guest]: likhna tha class mein.
[Guest]: So that again that atmosphere of being kind of alienated in the class again pushed me
[Guest]: towards books and writing.
[Guest]: To wo karte karte phir hum school poora humne kiya Lucknow mein by 98 so in 98 I graduated
[Guest]: from my school intermediate jo bhi humara hota hai aur uske baad phir ek saal ki tyaari
[Guest]: aur phir main Banaras chala gaya engineering karne.
[Guest]: So yeah that's basically the early life.
[Amit Varma]: Now many things I want to double click on and the first of them is language.
[Amit Varma]: So I recorded this episode recently which isn't yet out mujhe pata nahi iske pehle
[Amit Varma]: aayega ki iske baad aayega I'll decide that but with this young entrepreneur called Vinay
[Amit Varma]: Singhal who started this platform called Stage and it's an OTT but it's an OTT for languages
[Amit Varma]: and it's not an OTT for languages like Hindi and Punjabi also it's a it's an OTT for
[Amit Varma]: dialects so the two channels so far I think are Haryanvi and Bhojpuri and he's getting
[Amit Varma]: original content made for them and Vinay said something which I thought about for a long
[Amit Varma]: time and which has stuck with me where he said that dekho cities have languages towns
[Amit Varma]: and villages have dialects sort of bhasha and boli in that sense and he spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how coming from a small village from Haryana he always had this inferiority complex right
[Amit Varma]: early in his episode he spoke about how in standard 8 he had to learn English and he
[Amit Varma]: couldn't understand what was being spoken in class but he took it as a challenge and
[Amit Varma]: next year he topped English and later in the episode he revealed to me something which
[Amit Varma]: surprised me he said learning Hindi was as difficult for him because he spoke that particular
[Amit Varma]: Haryanvi dialect which was in his village and talking to him sort of brought home starkly
[Amit Varma]: how language in India is a caste system of its own you know English top of the ladder
[Amit Varma]: you're always showing where you are on the social ladder by showing off your sophistication
[Amit Varma]: and all that and you know one reason why people use these British pomposities which the British
[Amit Varma]: have left behind but we continue that's a bad habit I try to get out of my writing students
[Amit Varma]: but but it's true of the other languages also and that is related to a worry that one
[Amit Varma]: can have across different domains which is a homogenization of culture right I did an
[Amit Varma]: episode on Indian food with Vikram doctor where he spoke about the Cavendish banana
[Amit Varma]: which to me is a wonderful metaphor for this where he pointed out that the Cavendish banana
[Amit Varma]: is a type of banana which first India exported to the world then it really took off in the
[Amit Varma]: US and Mexico and all that because it was just the perfect banana for them meaning
[Amit Varma]: it kept for a long time easy to mass manufacture whatever it is then it came back to India
[Amit Varma]: they brought it back to India our own thing and now it is replacing all other kinds of
[Amit Varma]: bananas so where we had dozens of different types of bananas local Jagame now the Cavendish
[Amit Varma]: is kind of replacing everything till a future generation may not know that there is some
[Amit Varma]: other kind of banana for them banana is Cavendish which is a pretty bland and tasteless variety
[Amit Varma]: I've seen that yeah the most boring yeah it's the most boring and for me that's a good metaphor
[Amit Varma]: for what could be happening culturally in terms of you know different dialects going
[Amit Varma]: into one language because as we urbanize which is on the whole a great thing big fan of urbanization
[Amit Varma]: but what it also does is that there is this incentive to then homogenize that you go to
[Amit Varma]: a big city you're not going to speak in your dialect because you feel inferior and you're
[Amit Varma]: going to talk in the language of whatever that city is and so on and what Vinay told
[Amit Varma]: me about the popularity of stage and the numbers it is getting in fact he said there's a reverse
[Amit Varma]: migration from Bollywood that people who went to Bollywood to make a living are coming back
[Amit Varma]: and they are making Haryanvi content Bhojpuri content which I didn't expect counterintuitive
[Amit Varma]: to me and which I think is amazing what kind of role did language sort of play in your
[Amit Varma]: you know in your development in a couple of ways one you've already pointed to the kind
[Amit Varma]: of complex it would give you and you would try hard to go to another level with you know
[Amit Varma]: the new languages you were encountered with but otherwise also in your art because I think
[Amit Varma]: one of the great privileges of being Indian is that you can be multilingual you can speak
[Amit Varma]: many languages now unfortunately the only language I have really engaged in deeply is
[Amit Varma]: English and I feel that that is a mistake I've made and a certain richness of experience
[Amit Varma]: is therefore lost to me and so on now in your work you're bringing all these influences
[Amit Varma]: together where is not just like English to hai hi but the other language is not just
[Amit Varma]: Hindi you know there's a particular kind of dialect which clearly in Masaan where you
[Amit Varma]: picked up and the characters are speaking in that and it's so natural and all that you've
[Amit Varma]: you've immersed yourself in different sort of dialects and languages so what do you feel
[Amit Varma]: about them do you think there is a danger that we might lose them or do you feel that
[Amit Varma]: the fact that the mainstream is crumbling alternate sources of entertainment are coming
[Amit Varma]: up will keep them alive as people start having the self-confidence to produce work in their
[Amit Varma]: own languages and how has it affected your work because I guess language and what you
[Amit Varma]: experience through every language gives an added layer to your experience of life and
[Guest]: Indian society yeah so language was a dialect cho hai yeh maine bhi bahut ek to first hand
[Guest]: jhela hai I'll share one incident which happened with us a few years ago lekin multiple aspects
[Guest]: hai aapke sawal ke pehla to yeh hai ki I wish I was not that complexed about Punjabi at
[Guest]: that time thankfully mere ghar mein phir bhi parents Punjabi bolte rahe abhi tak bolte
[Guest]: hain aapas mein punjabi mein baat karte hain to main samajh leta hun punjabi mujhe punjabi
[Guest]: sunna bahut pasand hai main padh nahi paata hun gurmukhi text that's again one laziness
[Guest]: I think woh bahut aasani se main jis din bhi seekhunga kyunki mujhe shabd to saare pata
[Guest]: hi hain mujhe grammar pata hai it's not like learning a new language it's simply learning
[Guest]: a new script and that's all aur woh jis din bhi hoga I hope I get time in the next few
[Guest]: months and I ace that but woh complex uss samay bahut zyada tha aur woh diya jata hai
[Guest]: because every language is ultimately a political project whatever language and there is this
[Guest]: famous saying I don't know I forgot kisne yeh kaha hai but language is a dialect with
[Guest]: an army of its own so jiske paas bhi power hai woh language ban jati hai aur jiske paas
[Guest]: power nahi hai usko dialect keh dete hain aur Hindi ke andar bahut saari bhaashayin samay
[Guest]: gayi woh braj hai woh abdi hai woh bhojpuri bhi hai ek hat tak woh haryanvi hai woh rajasthani
[Guest]: hai kahi bhaashayon se humne shabd liye aur phir woh unko keh diya ki woh dialect hain
[Guest]: bhojpuri ne bhi wohi kaam phir kuch aur dialects ke saath kiya hoga jo ab dialect kahi jati
[Guest]: hain toh woh hamesha se woh chalta raha hai woh struggle aur uski wajah se bahut logon
[Guest]: ko bahut saari complexes se jujhna pada hai aur woh complex kabhi khatam nahi hoga woh
[Guest]: nahi ho sakta hai jab main Punjabi bolta tha toh mujhe lagta tha ki kash Hindi aa jaye
[Guest]: Hindi aa gayi toh lagta tha kash Angrezi aa jaye Angrezi aa gayi toh phir lagta hai ki
[Guest]: theek Angrezi nahi hai kisi foreigner se baat karo toh aapko lagta hai ki uska bahut
[Guest]: saari shabdon ke pronunciation abhi bhi ekdum hi aachanak se aaj subah hi baat karte
[Guest]: karte main kisi se mujhe bolna tha message aur maine message bola maine which is a bit
[Guest]: of a Punjabi tone aaya waha pe aur phir I felt ashamed and whatever in a very split
[Guest]: second kind of a reaction where maine correct kiya kut ko lekin wo humare andar wo itna
[Guest]: ingrain kar diya gaya hai ki abhi bhi aksar mere saath Angrezi bolne maine mujhe kaafi
[Guest]: dikkat hoti hai Hindi se kahi zyada lekin bahut saari cheezein abh humare expression
[Guest]: main aisi aagayi hai ki wo Angrezi main zyada padha hai bahut wo wala idea toh phir wo
[Guest]: Angrezi main wo shabd hum uske liye dhundte rehte hai jaise abhi thodi der pehle maine
[Guest]: scope shabd istimal gaya ab scope ko main Hindi main kya bolun mujhe nahi samajh aaya
[Guest]: toh maine scope bola waha pe toh yeh bahut saari iske layers humare andar bante jate
[Guest]: hain wo complex ke hote hain aur aur ek umr ke baad phir wo shame hota hai ki kyu
[Guest]: nahi sikhiye apni bhaasha ek umr tak aap usse nikalne ki usse bhaagne ki koshish karte
[Guest]: rehte hain aur phir ek umr aati hai jaha pe aap wapas uspe jaane ki koshish karte
[Guest]: ho tab tak either it's too late sometimes or or you don't have enough time or or
[Guest]: you have lost that that moment where you could have done with that something done
[Guest]: something with that knowledge or that could have enriched your work jo aaj main
[Guest]: sochta hun ki as you were talking about this platform main chahata hun ki main
[Guest]: punjabi main kuch likhoon main punjabi main kuch kahaani likhoon jo ki ya to
[Guest]: chhape text form mein ya film ho ya gaane ho toh ek gaana maine likha bhi punjabi
[Guest]: aur jo aaya film mein uske laawa aur likhe hue hain jinka bhi kuch hua nahi hain
[Guest]: but waha mujhe handicap lagta hai kyunki punjabi aati hai mujhe but maine punjabi
[Guest]: ko literary language ki tarah kabhi padha nahi hain kabhi seekha nahi hain
[Guest]: conversational aati hai jo ghar mein boli jaati hai hindi maine literary padhi hai
[Guest]: angrezi maine literary padhi hai so it's matlab yeh ek tarah ki bahut hi
[Guest]: sharminda hone wali baat hai ki angrezi ko main angrezi mein main kuch likh sakta
[Guest]: hun jo literary quality ka kaha jaa sakta hai lekin punjabi main nahi likh sakta
[Guest]: jo meri mother tongue hai toh wo ek failure hai jo ki hamesha se as i said ki
[Guest]: language is a political project and you sometimes aapke haath mein wo choice
[Guest]: nahi di jaati hai ki aap kis language ko chhod denge aur kis ko pakad denge
[Guest]: system hi waisa hai aur system aapko sab ko ek jaisa banana chahata hai
[Guest]: kyuki usi se i think wo ek jo yeh 20th century ka jo sabse bada idea
[Guest]: political idea which is nationalism uska core language hai aur uska core hai ki
[Guest]: sab ek bhaasha bolen ek bhaasha samjhen aur ek official communication ki
[Guest]: ek bhaasha hai wo sirf official communication ki bhaasha na ho wo aapke
[Guest]: bahut sabse jo androoni thoughts hai unki wo bhaasha ho taaki wo aapko
[Guest]: bahut asaani se pakad sakein jab aapne kuch galat socha ho kyuki wo bhaasha
[Guest]: same hai you can't really escape toh wo sara ka sara system us tarah se
[Guest]: bana hua hai ab uske baad jo doosra sawal aata hai ki aap kya kiya jaye
[Guest]: iss samay mein koshish kar raha hoon wapas chahane ki maine haal hi mein urdu
[Guest]: seekhi hai padhna aur likhna the script kyuki wo bhi ek aur cheez thi jo
[Guest]: humare ghar mein sab ko aati thi mere nana ji ko mere dada ji ko mere papa
[Guest]: ko aati hai aur wo ek one of the one of the scripts thi jisme aap apni
[Guest]: wahi cheezin bayaan karte the jo aap hindi aur punjabi mein karte the aur
[Guest]: delhi mein abhi bhi hindustan mein shayad ek hi jagah bachhi hai jahan pe
[Guest]: aap hindi, angrezi, urdu aur punjabi jahan pe street signs abhi bhi kaafi
[Guest]: saare hai kyunki ek zamani mein wahan aati thi yeh chaaro bhaasha hai
[Guest]: koi aur chaaro bhaashaon ke log wahan equal power mein the in a way
[Guest]: ki koi hoga jo gurmukhi padhega, koi hoga jo nastalik padhega, koi hindi
[Guest]: padhega, koi angrezi padhega aur yeh chaaro mere bohot nazdi thi yeh chaaro
[Guest]: bhaasha hain like they were within reach so to say and I could have learnt
[Guest]: all four of them but because the world kind of chose ki aap yeh sabse pehle
[Guest]: yeh seekh lein phir yeh seekh lein aur phir uske time bachta hai toh baaki
[Guest]: dono seekh lein uska humare paas koi kaam nahi hai but aaj as the next
[Guest]: part of your question, kya yeh non-political backing wali bhaasha hai
[Guest]: kya yeh gaayab ho jayengi nahi kabhi nahi hongi yeh ek natural process
[Guest]: hai jo balance hota rehta hai jahaan pe aap kisi cheez ko jab khatam
[Guest]: karne jaate hain toh apne aap the very simple process of demand and
[Guest]: supply wala jo hai duniya mein ek time pe kaali mirch ki wahi value thi
[Guest]: jo aaj sone ki hai ya ek time pe simple resham ki wo value thi jo aaj
[Guest]: sone ki ya usse mehngi kisi cheez ki hai platinum ki hai toh jo cheez
[Guest]: kam ho jaate hain apne aap wo attractive ban jaate hain ek simple sa
[Guest]: law hai aur jo kam hoti hai usko just I know it is like looking at
[Guest]: languages as commodities but uski wajah se bahut saari bhaashain zinda
[Guest]: reh jaate hain kyunki jo kam hoti hain usko champion karne mein aap ko
[Guest]: bhi zyada value milti hai aur phir wo apne aap log uski taraf jaate hain
[Guest]: toh urdu for example what rekhta has managed to do with urdu and to
[Guest]: celebrate urdu I don't think this was possible 40 years ago because
[Guest]: urdu was not in danger at that time now it is and now people want to
[Guest]: save it and people want to show that they are part of a world where
[Guest]: urdu is very valuable toh rekhta agar aap gaye hain kya kabhi?
[Amit Varma]: I have seen events on YouTube and all that but I have never heard of it
[Guest]: toh main NH10 gaya tha Pune which is festival of music and festival of
[Guest]: modern music and whatever all kinds but mostly it is you know what we
[Guest]: call very contemporary music a few years ago like 3-4 years ago NH10
[Guest]: was a symbol of what youth want in a way everything the kind of music
[Guest]: the kind of food the kind of hanging out spaces the kind of drinks the
[Guest]: kind of everything cool was kind of NH10 toh main NH10 gaya tha
[Guest]: mera wahan pe performance tha stand-up comedy ka aur maine dekha ki
[Guest]: uff itne saare matlab ab kyuki main I have crossed 40 in terms of age
[Guest]: so ab jo 20-22 saal ke toh mentally it is aging is always a very complicated
[Guest]: process you never really kind of accept the age you are in terms of not
[Guest]: able to quantify that in terms of 40 yeh hai aur yeh 20 se itna alag hai
[Guest]: lekin jab aap dekhte hain 20-22-25 saal ke logon ko at gathering where
[Guest]: they are in majority and they are the only people around and you suddenly
[Guest]: you feel that disconnect ok maybe that's why I don't understand this music
[Guest]: it's a way to quantify our age ki ok because I am too far from this age
[Guest]: group and you know this kind of whatever their you know their landmark
[Guest]: pop culture symbols are and general landmarks in life are toh mujhe laga
[Guest]: ki bahut zyada cool jage hai aur yaha pe mujhe pata nahi tha yeh duniya
[Guest]: exist karti hai ek saath wo duniya aap dekhte hain TV pe lekin us duniya
[Guest]: ka ek jo big festival ho aap wahan paunj jayen toh aapko us duniya ke
[Guest]: bahut saari cheezein samajh aani lagti so I was super impressed and I was
[Guest]: super not super but slightly feeling out of place also ki yeh matlab meri
[Guest]: duniya nahi hai shayad and just by chance waha se seedhe mujhe rekhta
[Guest]: jaana tha ek performance ke liye yaha pe stand up comedy performance
[Guest]: tha waha pe ek language pe I was just hindi aur urdu pe ek main choti si
[Guest]: kuch session le raha tha so Pune se mene flight liye Delhi Delhi me
[Guest]: rekhta pauncha aur rekhta mein wahi age group tha same age group most of
[Guest]: them and they were celebrating urdu and they were again not it was not in
[Guest]: in a small town it was in Delhi in the heart of Delhi and it was huge and
[Guest]: it was people who were just there for that language and for their love
[Guest]: for people who kind of write in that language or you know create in that
[Guest]: language toh waha music bhi tha waha poetry bhi thi aur waha pe kitabon ke
[Guest]: bhi bahut saari stalls the aur waha calligraphy ke stalls the and khade
[Guest]: hone ki jage nahi thi jab main mushaira jo shaam ko ho raha tha so I could
[Guest]: see two different things one which has which is just coming up which is
[Guest]: what NH10 kind of represents the kind of new music which is EDM and you know
[Guest]: jo abhi aa raha hai logon ne abhi dekha hai aur ek doosri cheez jo kareeb
[Guest]: kareeb 1000 saal se hai if we go by whatever the documentation kareeb
[Guest]: kareeb 1200 ke aas paas pehli ghazal likhi gayi thi in Dakkan and Vali
[Guest]: Dakni was not the first whatever ghazal writer but in the first few so
[Guest]: around I think 1300 ke aas paas Vali Dakni rahe hai toh 1000 saal ho gaya
[Guest]: hai aur wo ek cheez hai jo ki 1000 saal mein bahut baar neeche gayi hai
[Guest]: shayad aur bahut baar upar aayi hogi aur iss samayin wo gaayab ho rahi hai
[Guest]: aisa hum sab maante hain aur wo sach bhi hai like factually like if you
[Guest]: look at the number of book sales and how many people can read the language
[Guest]: but then the language is not just written text it is a culture it is the
[Guest]: spoken word it is the existence of that language in a very in all the again
[Guest]: jahan se baat shuru hi ki in the political discourse wo bhaasha kitni hai
[Guest]: bahut zyada hai ab ki baar modi sarkar mein modi shabd bhi urdu hai
[Guest]: hindustan mein jo hindu shabd hai wo urdu hai toh har jage wo hai
[Guest]: aapko uske baare mein pata nahi hai aur theek hai lekin wo batane ke liye
[Guest]: log hai aur wo rekhta is one of the examples but generally if you look
[Guest]: at just the trajectory of Hindi film music also 80s 90s mein urdu gaayab
[Guest]: ho gayi thi mann labhi hai jo 30 saal jo kharaab music ke rahe jo mid 80s
[Guest]: se shuru hua aur mid 2005 tak whatever jo ek ajeeb sa phase tha and now
[Guest]: again it is coming back it is coming back in new ways it is coming back in
[Guest]: something like jo abhi love stories pe debate hua theek hai usmein urdu bhi hai
[Guest]: aur phir usmein angrezi bhi hai aur usmein hindi bhi hai it is finding its
[Guest]: space and that's what dialects do that's what languages do when they are about
[Guest]: to be kind of pushed off a cliff they develop new limbs and they develop new
[Guest]: ways to see back in and now for one small story jo main shuru mein mein
[Guest]: jo kaha ki kissa hua tha maare saath toh Raj Kumari who is an artist who is a
[Guest]: Madhubani artist and who is my wife also and she she and I decided to do a
[Guest]: graphic novel in Chhota Nagpuria dialect toh Chhota Nagpuria ab dialect hai
[Guest]: apne aapme bhaasha hai uska poora grammar ki bahut saari kitabe hai which
[Guest]: can you know all the material evidence is there ki wo bhaasha hai apne aapme
[Guest]: lekin ab usko dialect kaha jaata hai aur usko dialect banane mein shayad jahan
[Guest]: tak mujhe samajh aata hai bhojpuri ka ek hissa hai ki bhojpuri ne usko push
[Guest]: kar diya ki hum bhaasha hai aur tum dialect ho jo bhojpuri ke saath hindi
[Guest]: ne kiya jo hindi ke saath ek tarah se English ya Angrezi kar rahi hai aur
[Guest]: hindi ne jo ek time pe Urdu ke saath ek kaam kiya tha ki tumhari alag script
[Guest]: ki kya zaroorat hai jo post-independence time tha jahaan pe hindi ne kaha ki
[Guest]: amari jo nagri script hai wohi ek script hai ussi mein likh lo aur wohi
[Guest]: asli bhaasha hai aur tum ek beech mein whatever convenient affair we had
[Guest]: now we don't need you you are kind of you can go to waha se woh phir
[Guest]: lekin Urdu found its way abhi woh Chhota Nagpuriya ke saath woh hua ki
[Guest]: Chhota Nagpuriya which is that area at the border of Jharkhand and
[Guest]: Odisha and Chhattisgarh and you know woh jo ek chhota sa belt hai waha pe
[Guest]: Chhota Nagpur ke ek dialect hai aur waha se Raj belongs to that area
[Guest]: and her family speaks that language and it was a story set in Gumla
[Guest]: which is in Jharkhand aur waha pe wohi bhaasha boli jati hai so we
[Guest]: thought okay wohi sach hai wohi authentic hai wohi ki bhaasha mein
[Guest]: hum yeh kitab karenge and it was a graphic novel abhi Hindi mein bhi
[Guest]: graphic novel bahut kam aate hain abhi tak I don't know of many
[Guest]: probably two or three which are made originally in Hindi and set in a
[Guest]: Hindi world and all toh humne socha hum usme karenge and it was kind of
[Guest]: it made sense ki woh Madhubani art hai aur Chhota Nagpuriya dialect hai
[Guest]: it will be very authentic and true to the place so we made a kind of a
[Guest]: manuscript or whatever you can call it it was like puri kitab humare paas
[Guest]: ready thi it came in a serialized fashion in a children magazine called
[Guest]: Chakmak toh Chakmak because it's an independent kind of a magazine toh
[Guest]: unhone wo chhapa aur wo har episode karte garte aise do saal usme episode
[Guest]: aaye and it became quite popular with kids aur door door ke bache jahan
[Guest]: bilkul sawal hi nahi tha ki unhone Bhojpuri bhi suni ho Chhota Nagpuriya
[Guest]: toh chod dijiye aap ki madlab yeh magazine jo Chakmak hai yeh Assam
[Guest]: mein bhi jati hai yeh Meghalaya mein jati hai yeh Kerala mein jati hai yeh
[Guest]: North mein Kashmir mein jati hai bahut aise jagon pe jahan Hindi bhi first
[Guest]: language nahi hai aur waha pe waha se bhi response aaya bachon ka ki bahut
[Guest]: acchi unko lagi aur wo uske jo shabd hain ki subah ko bihaan kahte hain ya
[Guest]: shaam ko sanjha kahte hain ya mendak ko beng kahte hain toh yeh saari cheezein
[Guest]: unhone ne discover ki aur unko maza aaya ab hum iski book form me proper
[Guest]: ek graphic novel banana chahate the aur serialized form me aaya tha so we
[Guest]: made a book out of it and added some more pages so I was I was writing that
[Guest]: thing and Raj was illustrating and doing the Chhota Nagpuriya dialogues
[Guest]: main Hindi mein likh raha tha mujhe woh bhaasha nahi aati hai toh humko
[Guest]: kisi ne suggest kiya ki aap kyunki yeh ek kaafi interesting language based
[Guest]: kaam hai aur sabse zyada reach jo hai wo national book trust ki hai sarkari
[Guest]: organization hain aap unke paas jayiye aur wo log kar sakte hain isko chhap
[Guest]: sakte hain aur aapko phir marketing ki tension nahi hain aur hamara yeh tha
[Guest]: ki hum chhate the ki sasti chhape kyunki graphic novel jo hai wo phir bahut
[Guest]: mehngi ho jayegi phir uski reach nahi hogi phir hum jaha chhate hain padhein
[Guest]: log waha nahi padhenge it will only be it will only reach some of the you know
[Guest]: whatever elites who can afford like a thousand rupees book but hum chhate the
[Guest]: ki do dhai so mein chhap jaye aur malab do dhai so mein final aa jaye bahar
[Guest]: toh hum gaye national book trust ke paas toh national book trust ne bola ki
[Guest]: aap hindi mein kyon nahi aap isko hindi kar diji hum chhap denge humne
[Guest]: ka yeh toh chhota nagpuriya hai yeh toh malab hindi se bahut door hai aur isko
[Guest]: hindi karenge toh humara jo authenticity ho chali jayegi so they said ki nahi
[Guest]: koi nahi koi nahi padhega isko yeh yeh bhaash hum log humare bhaasha ke
[Guest]: department hain alag alag bhaasha ke hain so aap hindi ko sabse yada funding
[Guest]: hai toh hindi mein agar aap chhapenge hindi mein kar denge toh hum chhap denge
[Guest]: hindi ko kaafi funding hai aur angrezi ko funding hai uske baad phir yeh
[Guest]: regional bangla and all uski funding hogi lekin aapko wahan jaa ke poochna
[Guest]: padega so then one of them suggested ki aap bhojpuri ke paas chale jaye
[Guest]: wo unke paas bhi thodi baat toh funding hai we went to bhojpuri again they said
[Guest]: ki bhojpuri kar dijiye chhota nagpuriya toh aap pachon ko bigad rahe hain
[Guest]: because is tarah toh nahi bola jaata hai yeh jo aap jo aapne grammar likhiye
[Guest]: yeh galat hai yeh aap bachon ke bolne ki bachon bigad jaayenge aur wo galat
[Guest]: bolna seekh jaayenge toh humne unko bataya ki yehi baat woh bhojpuri ke baare
[Guest]: mein bolte hai hindi waale toh aap what do you have to say to that ki bhojpuri
[Guest]: bhi galat hai unke aisaab se toh hindi sahi hai so they said nahi nahi woh toh
[Guest]: humari ladayi chal rahi hai exactly toh phir aap bhi lad rahe hain toh
[Guest]: you are basically you are oppressed but oppressing someone else which is what
[Guest]: I say about unique about India in America there are there is the oppressor
[Guest]: and there is oppressed so white and black in India there are so many layers
[Guest]: of oppression everyone is a b ko kar raha hai b c ko kar raha hai c d ko kar raha
[Guest]: hai aur b c aur d ko kar raha hai lekin b ko b ka jo gussa hai a se wo c pe
[Guest]: nikal deta aur wo balance ban jaata hai and they kind of maintain that thing
[Guest]: okay you oppress me but allow me to oppress this guy and I'll be okay with
[Guest]: my oppression so which is what they were doing and ultimately we had to make so
[Guest]: many rounds to so many people to convince them to do this book in chota
[Guest]: Nagpuria didn't work out with any of them and ultimately our editors at
[Guest]: Eklavya jo ki dino ne serialize kiya tha usko then one of those editors
[Guest]: Sushil Shukla they had to break away and make another publication house and
[Guest]: start that publication house with this as one of their first books jo ki phir
[Guest]: humne chota Nagpuria mein chhapi and after that it has been amazing ki jo
[Guest]: response aaya hai generally sabse aur especially from the chota Nagpuria
[Guest]: community and people who are scholars in that language and it's been amazing and
[Guest]: they have they have promised to I don't know abhi pichle again because of
[Guest]: pandemic so this book came out in 2019 and after that there has been pandemic
[Guest]: but what we know is there are some other books for children now being planned in
[Guest]: that language so it's a start in a way ki thek hai wo representation bhi mila
[Guest]: logon ko samajh aaya hai ki this is not that alien language or difficult to
[Guest]: understand for people who don't even speak that language to wo rasta nikal
[Guest]: jaata hai struggle yaha pe hai bahut saara dialect or language ka yeah I mean
[Amit Varma]: this seems like such a fantastic labor of love but I still worry more about the
[Amit Varma]: network effect like in terms of incentives it just makes sense for anyone
[Amit Varma]: to master a language which maximum people speak so in the future I really
[Amit Varma]: see ki you know log apna apne gaon ki dialect bhool jayenge lekin Chinese
[Amit Varma]: seekhenge ya Spanish seekhenge because those are the other languages where
[Amit Varma]: there is in this globalized world maximum advantage and I guess Urdu could
[Amit Varma]: fight back because Urdu has that kind of army of its own in the shape of all the
[Amit Varma]: literature and poetry have accumulated over time so you can rally your troops
[Amit Varma]: around that but you know smaller dialects may not have I want to go back
[Amit Varma]: to something else you kind of mentioned about that how in English you can write
[Amit Varma]: something which seems literary but in Punjabi you can't and the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing is and I was thinking about this earlier and I wanted to ask you about
[Amit Varma]: this because this confuses me a little bit that when I think of English writing
[Amit Varma]: and English poetry and English songwriting particularly the key thing
[Amit Varma]: that all great songwriting has in English is that you're using words which
[Amit Varma]: people use in their everyday lives like Bob Dylan is saying the answer my friend
[Amit Varma]: is blowing in the wind he is not saying the response comrade is wafting in the
[Amit Varma]: breeze right the kind of flowery language beginning writers might use to
[Amit Varma]: impress the answer my friend is blowing in the wind or there's a great song by
[Amit Varma]: Bruce Springsteen called you're missing which is you know after 9-11 you know
[Amit Varma]: someone goes back home and the person isn't there and the refrain of that is
[Amit Varma]: everything is everything everything is everything but you're missing you know
[Amit Varma]: tears me up every time it's so beautiful but it's normal everyday simple words
[Amit Varma]: and when I teach my writing class I take them back to Shakespeare about how he
[Amit Varma]: was using the simple everyday language of his time and capturing those rhythms
[Amit Varma]: so Joe loaf you know fancy way may bolt a iambic pentameter that's the way we
[Amit Varma]: speak you know let's go for a cup of coffee that's iambic pentameter right
[Amit Varma]: that's the way we speak and there's a reason it's like that now what I see in
[Amit Varma]: the Indian languages or what I see in Urdu for example is that like you said
[Amit Varma]: that they'll often be words which not only will I not understand but someone
[Amit Varma]: who knows the language also won't understand they'll have to look them up
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and in a sense it's almost like it's even a feature not a
[Amit Varma]: bug that looking up the language will enhance your understanding in some way
[Amit Varma]: and it's not a bad thing at all somewhere else in some interview of
[Amit Varma]: something you've spoken about how you know when you entered the industry as a
[Amit Varma]: lyricist people would tell you don't write like Gulzar because there was that
[Amit Varma]: impression here and nobody understands the language he uses but as you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out Gulzar's most popular songs are incredibly popular in just that kind of
[Amit Varma]: language and at the same time in your songs I have seen you use simple language
[Amit Varma]: and simple metaphors like moh moh ke thage the threads around your fingers or
[Amit Varma]: you know the Dushyant Kumar poem that you kind of took forward with the rail
[Amit Varma]: and a pull you know simple words metaphors of everyday things which people
[Amit Varma]: relate to so what has been sort of your approach to this like I understand
[Amit Varma]: languages are also fundamentally very different in different ways you know
[Amit Varma]: like Japanese and Korean are minimal English is somewhere in the middle you
[Amit Varma]: know Punjabi, Bengali, Urdu can all be quite maximalist and expressionistic so
[Amit Varma]: what is your sense of the different languages and is it some inherent
[Amit Varma]: difference that this particular quality is coming from and how did you then sort
[Amit Varma]: of begin to approach this in your own writing?
[Guest]: So, there are two different things I think for a language to have an impact in poetry
[Guest]: you can use simple words only when you know it is complicated and you know
[Guest]: that this is simple and this is complicated so simply another example is
[Guest]: for example for Picasso to arrive at that very typical Picasso form I forgot
[Guest]: it's called Cubism he started just as a very serious portrait artist or
[Guest]: jitne jo ek jo same ka super realist photo realist jo bhi bolte hain usko
[Guest]: portrait se shuru kiya and then he started reducing and reducing and
[Guest]: reducing and arriving at that you know over simplified form
[Guest]: jismein do cheezein thi ek wo simplified tha lekin doosra wo uski voice thi
[Guest]: aur har artist apni voice pe apne raaste se paunchta hai aur wo raasta
[Guest]: hamesha hi I feel goes through mastering the most academic of things and the most
[Guest]: complicated of things and then slight then reducing them one by one and you
[Guest]: know reducing the ingredients and then coming down to something which is very
[Guest]: which is the optimal or minimal or whatever is your taste so hamesha har
[Guest]: bhasha mein agar aap kahen ki haang rezi mein ya hindi mein bhi sabse jo
[Guest]: achi ya jo sabse time kya bolte hain time elastic kind of things jo hamesha
[Guest]: rahi hain hamesha rahengi wo zyadatar wahi hoti hain jo simple hoti hain
[Guest]: galib ne bahut kuch likha hai jo Persian mein hain ya jo kho gaya kyuki wo
[Guest]: ya to translatable nahi hain ya wo usko samajhne mein phir aapko bahut zyada
[Guest]: research karni padegi isliye sabse aasaan jo galib ka azaaro khwaishe hain
[Guest]: seekhi aur khwaish pe dam nikhle to wo sabse aasaan hai samajhna lekin wahan
[Guest]: tak paunchne ke liye jo journey galib ki rahi ki wo 5 saal ki umr se wo seekhna
[Guest]: wo shuru kiya hun mein urdu aur yazar likna aur then probably at the age of 60
[Guest]: he came to that thing where he wrote that and which became his kind of
[Guest]: identity in a way same for the Bob Dylan example you gave or any any great
[Guest]: artist ultimately aapko sabse pehle you can't start with saying ki main simple
[Guest]: hi jaanta hu main simple hi likhunga aap shuru to hamesha wahi se karoge
[Guest]: jahaan pe aap sab kuch saare tools aapke haath mein hone chahiye saari bhaash
[Guest]: vocabulary aapki bahut deep honee chahiye jo bhi bhaasha mein aap likhna
[Guest]: chahate hain which is why I was saying ki main Punjabi mein I feel I can't
[Guest]: write kyuki mujhe pata hi nahi hai ki main jo likh raha hun wo hazaar baar
[Guest]: ho chuka hai kya ki ye ekdum naya hai to understand the quality of what you
[Guest]: are writing you need to be very aware of the cliches of that particular form
[Guest]: and that language and that whatever space to mujhe nahi pata hai mujhe
[Guest]: Hindi ka bahut zyada pata hai Hindi filmon ka bahut zyada pata hai ki kya
[Guest]: cliche hai wo maine pura shuru se lekar ab tak jo bhi 1940 se lekar ab tak
[Guest]: ye jitne gaane bane hain aur jis tare se bane hain aur unki poetry kya hai
[Guest]: kis darze ki hai aur usme kaun kaun se ideas ho chuke hain kaun kaun se
[Guest]: nahi hua hain wo mujhe pata hai wo main confidently kahe sakta ho
[Guest]: Urdu ab thoda bahut jitna bhi Urdu poetry padhi hai to pata hai ki thik hai
[Guest]: ye ek general kuch kuch cheezein pata hai utne deeply nahi pata hai jitna
[Guest]: Hindi mein pata hai Angrezi mein bhi jitna bhi fiction ya non-fiction
[Guest]: padha hai to ek andaza hai ki ye level hota hai agar main ek panna
[Guest]: likh hoon Angrezi mein kisi cheez ka koi article jo main kahi baar
[Guest]: Indian Express ya kuch akbaaron ke likha hai main to itna to mujhe
[Guest]: bharosa hai ki main jo likh ke bhej raha hoon ye isme kuch hai kehne
[Guest]: laayak kuch naya hai aur bhasha bhi aisi nahi hai ki ekdami bakwaas
[Guest]: hai ya barbaad hai so wo doosra jo zyada badi cheeze hai you have to
[Guest]: find your voice now that voice could lead you to using very complicated
[Guest]: or heavy words some poets have that Urdu mein ya Hindi mein bhi kahi aise
[Guest]: poets rahe hain aur wo celebrated bhi hain like Muktibodh is one of them
[Guest]: ki Hindi ke mahaantam kaviyon mein unka naam aata hai but wo bahut hi
[Guest]: ek taraf Muktibodh hain doosri taraf Dushyant kumar hain Dushyant kumar
[Guest]: jo hai wo bhi bahut deep baatein bahut heavy baatein bahut politically
[Guest]: sharp commentary bahut aasaan bhasha mein unke aa jaati hai
[Guest]: wahin Muktibodh hain jo ki bahut simple si cheez bhi kahi baar bahut
[Guest]: tedhe aur bahut bhaari shabdon mein kehte hain so it's about finding
[Guest]: your voice what you are comfortable with or what you are made for or what
[Guest]: kind of literary world you want to channel through you
[Guest]: wo rasta bhi utna hi lamba hai jitna ki us vocabulary ko ek technical
[Guest]: point of view se master karne ka hai wo jo finding your voice which
[Guest]: I feel is where which I find disappointing that a lot of people
[Guest]: don't really value that people understand the rigor needed in
[Guest]: mastering the technicalities of a language or technicalities of
[Guest]: a form if it is fiction uski jo bhi uska jo craft ke jo elements
[Guest]: hote hain ya poetry hai to usme wo agar for example it is a very
[Guest]: specific kind of poetry with a specific kind of meter let's say it's a
[Guest]: haiku or it's a triveni which is one kind of form ya ghazal hai ab uske
[Guest]: jo technicalities hai wo bahut log sikhate bhi hain infact there are
[Guest]: teachers who teach you ghazal writing but they can't really write a ghazal
[Guest]: which can be truly called a ghazal which is great or even you know worth
[Guest]: it to us tare ki cheeze bhi hoti hain but ultimately it is I think
[Guest]: the major struggle or quest for any artist is to find that voice
[Guest]: aur wo voice kaise milti hai uska bhi sabka apna apna tarika hota hai
[Guest]: but wo bhi bahut abstract sa process hai mere hesaap se kyunki
[Guest]: koi aapko bata bhi nahi sakta hai ki aapki voice kya hai aur koi aasi
[Guest]: koi dictionary bhi nahi hai voice ki ki achha yeh wali meri hai aap
[Guest]: khol ke it's not even like you can tick or you can do by trial and error
[Guest]: or you can do by elimination ki yeh wali achha yeh wali manch pe fit
[Guest]: hoti hai aur yeh nahi hoti hai it's ultimately how I see it is you're
[Guest]: dropped in in a very dark place ekdum dur dur tak andhera hai aapko
[Guest]: bata bhi nahi hai ki yeh jahan aapko drop kiya gaya hai there's zero
[Guest]: visibility toh yaha pe koi deewaar hai kya aur agar deewaar hai toh
[Guest]: kitni door hai so in imagine an infinite kind of a space with walls
[Guest]: around there are walls at some point but aapko nahi bataya gaya aapko
[Guest]: toh drop kar diya gaya hai now to get out of that place generally the
[Guest]: logical thing is you take a step in some direction which you intuitively
[Guest]: feel or be random even if you don't have any intuition be random and
[Guest]: just start walking and if you hit a wall okay you have found one anchor
[Guest]: kind of a thing and then you start walking along the wall and then you
[Guest]: see oh maybe the darkness is kind of getting deeper or getting lighter so
[Guest]: maybe there is light that way so it's like finding yourself every step of
[Guest]: the way and trying to get out of that darkness and you may never get out
[Guest]: of that darkness but you may arrive at the place where there is a hole in
[Guest]: the in the roof of that cave and there is some light streaming in for five
[Guest]: hours a day and you know for sure okay this is light very clearly this is
[Guest]: the cave where you are and either you're happy with that small chunk of light or
[Guest]: you then try to make that hole bigger by finding a break and then trying to
[Guest]: break and maybe at some point right trying to break out of the cave and
[Guest]: arrive whatever come out of the cave and actually see proper sunlight and all
[Guest]: so it's that kind of a process where you have only one thing driving you that
[Guest]: you have to find your voice where you have to invent the tools to find your
[Guest]: voice you have to also know what voice you are seeking without knowing what
[Guest]: voice it is going to be so it's a very sorry I'm sounding very very abstract
[Guest]: and very very I don't know over philosophical or something but it is I
[Guest]: think it is the it is the only process you can follow because no voice can
[Guest]: tell that this is your voice and that was one of the reasons why I didn't join
[Guest]: FTII so I did write the exam in 2003 because I wanted to become a writer and
[Guest]: finishing college my engineering degree from IIT BHU which is now in IIT at that
[Guest]: time it was IIT BHU but I left from there and then I came to Pune in 2003 and
[Guest]: I did a job in Pune in software and then there was a diploma film in FTII for
[Guest]: which I translated dialogues and assisted in that film as an art team I was
[Guest]: making lots of Chinese lamps for the art team on a daily basis but there I
[Guest]: thought I can give the exam of FTII screenwriting course that year was
[Guest]: starting in 2004 so I did write the exam and I cleared the exam interview and I
[Guest]: got selected and then I got scared because I was like voice means at that
[Guest]: time I didn't even have this word to understand myself that I am looking for
[Guest]: a voice, I just knew that I didn't want to be pushed in a certain direction and
[Guest]: being told that you have to seek this I didn't want to be told at that point I
[Guest]: was like okay we will have to come back but at least at this point I need to
[Guest]: know what I want I don't even know what I want except I want to be a writer but
[Guest]: then is this the path where they tell me this is what a writer is and this is how
[Guest]: you achieve that dream I didn't want to be told at that point because I was like
[Guest]: I understood so much that this process will not be so easy where in a year
[Guest]: they will make me a writer so I thought that I will take clarity first that what
[Guest]: is it to become a writer and what kind of a writer you have to become and what
[Guest]: kind of stories you have to tell instead of this very very easily influenced kind
[Guest]: of mindset if I go there and then it takes me another five years to get out
[Guest]: of that kind of a de-addiction program then I thought okay I will go later and
[Amit Varma]: I never went back but yeah
[Amit Varma]: I like what you said about you know when you talk about simplicity in language
[Amit Varma]: about getting to the essential you have to first engage with the inessential and
[Amit Varma]: figure out what it is that you know you need to strip away you know regarding
[Amit Varma]: voice you know even when my writing students ask me about that like one
[Amit Varma]: metaphor and I know it's an inexact metaphor but that I use is you think
[Amit Varma]: about how a baby learns to speak right in a cruel thought experiment you put a
[Amit Varma]: baby in a room without human contact it won't learn to speak there's nothing to
[Amit Varma]: take from you know you might have structures in your brain that could
[Amit Varma]: potentially speak language but you can't do it if you are just exposed to a
[Amit Varma]: couple of people say the parents you learn to speak in a very limited way the
[Amit Varma]: more people you are exposed to the more sort of influences you've taken by
[Amit Varma]: osmosis so everybody will have a particular way of speaking but like voice
[Amit Varma]: like like that artistic voice you speak of its nebulous it's impossible to
[Amit Varma]: define you can't say yeh hai iska voice you know but you know it when you see it
[Amit Varma]: and it only comes over a period of time of immersion which which is why I guess
[Amit Varma]: I get your decision not to join FTII because you just wanted to continue
[Amit Varma]: immersing yourself in everything that you you know rather than being put in a
[Amit Varma]: particular direction so what was the rest of that process of sort of finding
[Amit Varma]: that voice like and would you say that there is a similarity between like you've
[Amit Varma]: created in so many mediums would you say there is a similarity in your voice in
[Amit Varma]: all of these different mediums like when I look at something like my son right
[Amit Varma]: the voice is restrained it is respectful of the viewer you are not spoon-feeding
[Amit Varma]: the viewer with explanations and background music and all of that you're
[Amit Varma]: respecting the intelligence of the this thing and that's kind of a voice so you
[Amit Varma]: know I mean I guess it's a voice of both Neeraj and you or it's a voice of the
[Amit Varma]: film that you decided upon I'm waiting to see your film when it comes out to
[Amit Varma]: see you know and you know and in your music obviously you're also working with
[Amit Varma]: guardrails where a director will want a particular feel or a music director will
[Amit Varma]: want a particular feel but at the same time you know you have a voice and then
[Amit Varma]: there are other forms where you don't have those guardrails like when you're
[Amit Varma]: doing a stand-up or you're doing poetry or when you're you know you wrote a book
[Amit Varma]: in Hindi as well when you're doing all of that there are no guardrails you can
[Amit Varma]: do what the hell you want you know so how did you come across these different
[Amit Varma]: voices is there sort of a common element in all of these voices over time how did
[Guest]: you arrive at it hmm so very difficult for me to kind of find the common
[Guest]: element apart from what has been told to me like I don't see you know these
[Guest]: things as like I don't I've never analyzed them with that sense okay is
[Guest]: make common except the only thing I can say is again it's like I know when the
[Guest]: voice is there and what that voice is is difficult for me to define but I know
[Guest]: that okay what truth
[Guest]: so again like politics where it has to you know be very present without without
[Guest]: any effort so when when whatever I write if if there is an effortless quality to
[Guest]: it while writing and so when I perform a joke or write a joke for you know for my
[Guest]: comedy I have to fill time and I know I have the setter but I don't know the
[Guest]: punchline and then I kind of you know write something which is a bit of a
[Guest]: force fit I know which which one is very natural and which one is the kind of
[Guest]: force kind of forced forced punchline same for songwriting
[Guest]: also many any patata commercially successful hoga yaar nahi hoga in fact
[Guest]: dadadar cheezan jo achi lagti hai wo nahi chalti hai yeh maine dekha hai ki
[Guest]: that is also one of the signs like later signs like after creation one of the
[Guest]: signs is okay didn't work so yeah probably there was some truth like ya
[Guest]: yeh zyada hi imandari se kiya hua kaam hai toh usme wo calculation nahi hai toh
[Guest]: kahin nahi samajh aaya hai zyada logon ko wo zyadaadar cases mein wo hua hai rare
[Guest]: cases mein yeh hua hai wo do masaan hai aur dum laga ke haisha hai matlab
[Guest]: momo ke dhaage hai jahaan pe kuch likhte hue laga tha ki yeh bahut naturally aaya
[Guest]: hai aur itna naturally aaya hai toh in fact all through the shooting of masaan I
[Guest]: kept thinking no one will see this film this film will never come out I I was
[Guest]: kind of sure about this I kept telling this to Neeraj much to his irritation and
[Guest]: I'm very later I I thought I was being very stupid about it like telling a
[Guest]: director ki film nahi aayegi because chhoti moti cheezon mein agar kuch ho
[Guest]: raha tha na ki yeh aise karein ki waise karein so I was saying ki you just be
[Guest]: very very you know out there and don't think about consequences because no one
[Guest]: is really going to see this film this film will never come out this is so
[Guest]: whatever true in our expression ki yeh kabhi nahi aasakte aise cheezon kaun
[Guest]: bahar lata hai toh mere dimaag mein wahi tha ahmesha se but then it came out and
[Guest]: it kind of found its its audience and toh wo jab bhi hua hai wo mujhe ab wo
[Guest]: matak aaya kaise shurvaati kuch saal jo hain when I moved to Bombay and I didn't
[Guest]: join FTI I moved to Bombay at that time in 2004 so one way I kind of figured on
[Guest]: my own again just by trial and error kind of a thing but engage deeply with
[Guest]: anything you do and not just work of art just anything you do in life be it
[Guest]: eating eating traveling like taking a local train was was a major high point
[Guest]: for me I was always trying to understand the system better engage with the system
[Guest]: better and there is a system even of taking a local train in Bombay it's a
[Guest]: major system because you have to like main Borivali jaata tha toh main Kandivali
[Guest]: mein rahta tha aur Borivali se train leni hoti thi Andheri ke liye, Bandra, jahan bhi jaana hai
[Guest]: toh aapko teen chaar cheezein dekhni padti hain jab aap pauchte hain maha pe platform pe
[Guest]: and this was pre M indicator days M indicator is an app which tells you
[Guest]: which train is coming on which platform in how many minutes and how much delay
[Guest]: it is or how crowded it is also now they are telling this is a new addition to M
[Guest]: indicator it's a fantastic app unpaid plug but these were pre M indicator
[Guest]: times and you had to be your own M indicator so there were many ways to engage
[Guest]: so I know there are many people most of the people actually don't engage on that
[Guest]: level with the system of local trains they arrive at the station they go on
[Guest]: stand on the platform and whichever train comes they get into it and they get out
[Guest]: for me that was quite boring and that was quite frustrating also a lot of
[Guest]: times ki I could have taken that train and I would have reached early and
[Guest]: kyunki wo wali fast aa gayi thi so so they were these three four things you
[Guest]: had to figure out ek toh aap kaunse platform se lere hain kyunki Borivali mein
[Guest]: 3-4 platform the jaha se charge gate ke liye trains aati thi kisi pe fast kisi pe
[Guest]: slow kisi pe wo wali fast jo ki Borivali se Andheri tak slow jaayegi uske haath
[Guest]: fast hogi lekin usme bheed kam hoti thi toh aap wo le sakte hain toh depending on
[Guest]: what time you are at the platform you have to figure out these three four
[Guest]: variables and then make the best decision and another decision so I kept adding
[Guest]: layers to it almost like a video game ke ok next level now I know kaunse train
[Guest]: se leni aur kitne kaunse platform se leni and all but now kis bogi me chadna
[Guest]: hai wo first class wali jo teen bogi hoti hai usme pehli me dusri me teesri me
[Guest]: depending on which platform I'm getting down at kyunki waha pe cd sabse nasdik
[Guest]: uspe hai so Borivali mein cd kam leni hai ki waha zyada waha kam leni hai
[Guest]: acha train aa rahi hai aur abhi train aane me ek minute hai toh should I move
[Guest]: because you utilize that one minute here and move to the end of the train jo
[Guest]: waha pe nahi chalna padega so these strange things I was doing with even the
[Guest]: train system with cooking with and of course with understanding cinema so I
[Guest]: didn't go to any film school ek do kitabe mene uthai screenwriting ki aur
[Guest]: mujhe wo zyada samajh nahi aayi kyunki usme zyada tar saare reference American
[Guest]: films ke the aur wo filme dekho phir kitab padho usse achha hai mene socha
[Guest]: main khud film dekh kar khud analyze karta hu so what a very rudimentary kind
[Guest]: of a process I started following is I would read a script and then watch that
[Guest]: film and then again read that script and then again watch the film with the
[Guest]: script in hand and see what they have done what transition they've used and
[Guest]: and then I found out later at some point that there are two versions of the
[Guest]: script one is pre-shooting and one is post-shooting draft toh bahut saari
[Guest]: scripts jo thi available wo post-shooting bhi banate hain wo log taaki jo exactly
[Guest]: jo shoot hua hai phir usko script mein for I think for the libraries and all
[Guest]: they make those versions so then I started comparing these two documents
[Guest]: without even watching the film so that was again another layer of being so my
[Guest]: general what I also tell lots of young writers who ask me for advice I tell
[Guest]: them to be a nerd that's all just be a nerd otherwise if you think you can be a
[Guest]: writer if you think okay I have a great story everyone has a great story you
[Guest]: have to make that story unique and a story which is even if it's it's it's
[Guest]: old cliche whatever but it has to have completely new take of your own and that
[Guest]: can happen only if you are a nerd about it you have to know every small
[Guest]: technicality of how how it works because it's not khas kar ke filmon mein ek
[Guest]: boundary hai writing prose writing fiction nonfiction whatever usmein you
[Guest]: can create a new form every week of course market will still kind of push
[Guest]: you into into this thing into bracket and into rules but cinema mein wo rules
[Guest]: bahut strict hain kyunki bahut saare log hain jo aapki script ko interpret
[Guest]: karne wale hain toh waha pe jaha rules bahut tight hain waha pe you have to be
[Guest]: very very aware of what every word matters and every word counts toh wo
[Guest]: aapko bahut dhyan se waha likhna padta hai toh mera wo process waha se shuru
[Guest]: hua jahaan pe I started engaging deeply with everything from cinema to music to
[Guest]: ordinary things in life and then analyzing what is resonating with me in
[Guest]: this process so for example in railway station whatever taking a local train
[Guest]: what was really driving me to do all that it was saving time it was being
[Guest]: very smart design in a way whatever I was creating designs of my own so
[Guest]: brevity came into my work through that whatever through that engagement that it
[Guest]: matters it kind of gives me a high it's something which I like so that is part
[Guest]: of my voice in a way what what kind of defines me as a person I want to be very
[Guest]: precise in expression and in general way of living toh kahin bhi ek second bhi
[Guest]: waste nahi hona chahiye it is almost like an OCD for me ki main give you a
[Guest]: very strange kind of an example main jab nahane ke liye main shirt utarta hu
[Guest]: aur wohi shirt mujhe t-shirt wapas pehni hoti hai nahane ke baad toh I make sure
[Guest]: ki agar yeh wapas pehni hai toh main isko seedha hi utarun taaki nahane ke baad
[Guest]: usko palatna na pade uske baju aur mera ek dead second bachega aur agar woh
[Guest]: dhone ke liye rakhni hai toh dhona usko ulta hai toh main ulta utarun taaki phir
[Guest]: dhone ke liye usko seedha na karna ulta na karna pade agar mainne seedha utar
[Guest]: di toh dhone ke liye ulta karna hai aur agar pehni hai toh seedha hi rakhna hai
[Guest]: so these very strange minute things I take care of which defines me as a
[Guest]: person ki okay I want to save time I want to save my time I want to save
[Guest]: everyone's time so when I write I have to be very very precise I don't want to
[Guest]: waste anyone's time in understanding what is written interpreting it then
[Guest]: later cutting it at the edit ki achha yeh toh extra tha yeh toh zarurat nahi thi
[Guest]: same for poetry I want to use words which are powerful and which are
[Guest]: absolutely unambiguous where needed and ambiguous where needed in terms of the
[Guest]: interpretation of the song but that preciseness kind of I figured is my part
[Guest]: of my voice second thing part of my voice I saw what what resonating what
[Guest]: was resonating with me through those experiments with reading scripts and
[Guest]: watching cinema and watching art a kind of risk-taking I figured which
[Guest]: recently I read a book jisme yeh research aayi thi main naam bhool gaya
[Guest]: which was about it was book of statistics only but it was about how
[Guest]: generally the system any system rewards risk-taking it was I think it was
[Guest]: called the generalized world or something main naam bhool it was one of
[Guest]: the I think sub titles of the book whatever the this thing caption of the
[Guest]: book range yes jo abhi mujhe pata chala but I was always observing these
[Guest]: things that I am responding better to stuff which is even if badly done even
[Guest]: if it is you know not commercially successful but it has that surprise
[Guest]: factor a risk-taking kuch ekdum hi naya kiya hai jo jo abhi tak nahi kisi ne
[Guest]: kiya tha jaise bhi wo matlab phir uske baad uski baaki cheezein mere liye choti
[Guest]: ho jati thi ki wo achha nahi kiya hai jo kehna chahate de ho keh nahi paayen
[Guest]: hai but at least they were trying stuff so that was the second thing which kind
[Guest]: of took me to the another layer of it which was I don't like cliches at all
[Guest]: and then I thought okay I will have to understand what cliches in every form
[Guest]: and what are the cliches and if you just start writing anything writing a script
[Guest]: an article the poet piece of poetry if you just manage to remove cliches from
[Guest]: every line it becomes something which is unique and which is of value to vo ek
[Guest]: doosra ek apne baare mein kuch ek rasta mila it's almost like okay the you know
[Guest]: the metaphorical hole in that cave wall I am talking about to bhale hi wo chote
[Guest]: chote chote chet the jahan se thodi thodi roshni aani shuru hui and I figured
[Guest]: ki okay ye ye cheezein hain jo jo main ho sakta hu ya jo mujhe define karti hain
[Guest]: toh istare ki aur bahut saari cheezein phir dheere dheere mujhe samajh aaya
[Guest]: ki meri jo apni zabaan hain jo ki hindustani jo ki Lucknow ki Hindi-Urdu mix
[Guest]: jo zabaan hain wo apne aap mein wo ek bahut bada non-cliche hai jo ki ek tarega
[Guest]: it not just represents a particular culture but it also represents a
[Guest]: particular time in that culture which is when I was in Lucknow and that time I
[Guest]: think all times are equally all decades everyone would whatever who has lived
[Guest]: through that decade in their teen years would say that that decade was the most
[Guest]: turbulent but still just on a very I think in an objective way the 90s were
[Guest]: very very unique in probably in the last hundred years of the world history that
[Guest]: when the world moved from analog to digital in all the aspects of life and we
[Guest]: have seen analog world also we have seen digital world also and we were right at
[Guest]: that age when everything is kind of awesome and everything is kind of
[Guest]: bullshit and you are in that hormonal phase where you respond very very you
[Guest]: know sharply to things. Toh us samay humne wo duniya dekhi and us duniya ki bhasha bhi mere paas hai
[Guest]: us duniya ki yaad hain us duniya ki transition wala jo ek phase so almost
[Guest]: like the world was also going through the same adolescence as I was going
[Guest]: through at that time so that kind of became my one of my strengths or
[Guest]: defining points as as a just as a as a writer I thought okay I can channel that
[Guest]: and I can use that that that confusion of that age and the excitement and the
[Guest]: fears of that age through whatever I kind of create toh wo sari cheeze dheere dheere
[Guest]: I think they fell in place through that six year period 2004 to 2010 was
[Guest]: probably my self learning phase where I was constantly writing and chucking
[Guest]: scripts and ideas and then saying okay this is one step closer but it's it's
[Amit Varma]: still not ready. I'll come back to biography but from what you've said one
[Amit Varma]: sort of digressive question before that like firstly I'm very impressed by the
[Amit Varma]: intentionality with which you do things and even your habit of optimizing for
[Amit Varma]: everyday things like wearing a shirt because that makes me feel better about
[Amit Varma]: myself like I remember a friend berating me because I was staying with him in
[Amit Varma]: Bangalore and we got off the lift and he got off first and he's standing and
[Amit Varma]: waiting for me and I told him bro why are you waiting the optimal thing is
[Unknown]: your door is there you have the key you go and open the door save time right
[Amit Varma]: so that is so that's kind of how my brain works that you know initially you
[Amit Varma]: might want to learn something by analogy but then you want to learn it from
[Amit Varma]: first principles you know so that you can do it really well and and I also you
[Amit Varma]: know saw glimpses of this in you know I went through your course on front row
[Amit Varma]: your course on screenwriting and you're also talking there about watching a film
[Amit Varma]: mapping emotions x-axis may up films keen on liquor books keen on liquor y-axis
[Amit Varma]: pay ups are a different emotions go to cross was guru I mean I would recommend
[Amit Varma]: every listener to check out your course I think it's a steal at the price at
[Amit Varma]: which it is selling there I'll link it from the show notes and which was also a
[Amit Varma]: demonstration of how mastering the craft or thinking deeply about the craft can
[Amit Varma]: often improve the art so much in ways that you might not realize now I want to
[Amit Varma]: ask you a question that I would hesitate to ask many people because I don't know
[Amit Varma]: if they would have so much intentionality in their work or whether they would have
[Amit Varma]: been so self-reflective but I feel this is something you would have thought
[Amit Varma]: about and a couple of things came to mind when I was watching re-watching
[Amit Varma]: Masaan yesterday the unabridged version on Netflix you know one of them is from
[Amit Varma]: the great director Amin Bairani who made films like Goodbye Solo where Bairani
[Amit Varma]: once in this fantastic interview with Roger Ebert a link from the show notes
[Amit Varma]: said that the central question in his work and it's a central question and
[Amit Varma]: Herzog's films also according to him where he got it from is how do you live
[Amit Varma]: in this world right and that's a central question and when I kind of go to that
[Amit Varma]: last scene in Masaan and and that seems to be at that point five minutes before
[Amit Varma]: the film ends a central question for the characters to kind of navigate in so
[Amit Varma]: many different ways and the other quote that came to my mind was something that
[Amit Varma]: one of my favorite novelist George Simenon once said where he said that the
[Amit Varma]: central theme in his work was that two people can never truly know each other
[Amit Varma]: right and I saw that last scene where these two people whose strands have been
[Amit Varma]: so separate a kind of about to meet and you know they're about to meet you also
[Amit Varma]: know they will never truly know each other because you you as a viewer now
[Amit Varma]: know their stories and so much depth and you've been in their skin and they'll
[Amit Varma]: never know each other in that way even though obviously you know and you hope
[Amit Varma]: that there is a connection between the two of them and I liked how Simenon who
[Amit Varma]: wrote more than 400 novels by the way extremely prolific said that this was a
[Amit Varma]: question in every single thing he wrote right and how Ramin Bairani spoke about
[Amit Varma]: the leitmotif so to say of his and Herzog's work being that question how do
[Amit Varma]: we live in this world so in your work what do you see as the concerns which
[Amit Varma]: are central to you like in that course on front row you spoke about how when
[Amit Varma]: you do this emotion mapping and you try to figure out what appeals to you and
[Amit Varma]: why and you said that I understood the reason I liked coming-of-age films right
[Amit Varma]: but that was understanding something about your taste as an artist do you
[Amit Varma]: feel that there are central threads which you know that go through all your
[Amit Varma]: work that that you keep coming back to yeah I think there are a few one
[Guest]: probably the strongest is this desire to escape and desire to just I don't know
[Guest]: deal deal with this almost an extension of how do you live in this world by
[Guest]: hoping for a better world that exists outside this world so both mujhe bachpan
[Guest]: se I don't know there are some probably some psychological reasons and there are
[Guest]: some whatever some personal reasons I can't really talk about but there is
[Guest]: always that feeling that I don't belong here that is something which has been a
[Guest]: constant theme in my life and which something I want to I keep talking about
[Guest]: in even in my comedy how do you kind of deal with this feeling of being a
[Guest]: misfit and the way is that yes there exists a world where you won't be a
[Guest]: misfit which is what Deepak and Shalu or Deepak and Devi everyone in Masan kind
[Guest]: of believes that they are not kind of accepted in this world but they want
[Guest]: they imagine a world where they will be kind of okay same for characters in
[Guest]: Sandeep or Pinky Farrar where you know they are kind of of course they are
[Guest]: flawed characters much more flawed as compared to the characters in characters
[Guest]: in Masan characters in Masan were mostly you know whatever victims of their
[Guest]: circumstances and the systems in Sandeep or Pinky Farrar they were victims but
[Guest]: they were also aggressors in many ways and still at some they become misfits
[Guest]: they are kind of on the run and they they start imagining this world and that
[Guest]: possibility of that world kind of creates that that space of agreeable I
[Guest]: don't know what's the word agreeability is a word no it can be a word okay
[Guest]: haan matlab ek ek dono ke beech ki ek duniya ban jaati hai jahaan pe wo dono
[Guest]: bas wahi ek cheez hai jis pe wo log dono agree karte hain ki shayad humare liye
[Guest]: ek baithar duniya otherwise they don't really agree on anything in the film
[Guest]: they are from two completely different worlds and kind of start understanding
[Guest]: each other only through this lens of victims of the system they both are a
[Guest]: part of so and in comedy also again how why do I do comedy is exactly because I
[Guest]: really can't deal with what I'm seeing on a day-to-day basis around me I really
[Guest]: have no reason to do comedy because it's it's very it's a very it's probably the
[Guest]: most traumatic thing I go through writing comedy and then performing on
[Guest]: stage and then kind of reflecting on it and how to make a joke better and the
[Guest]: joke is about some like really serious you know systemic atrocity which is
[Guest]: happening around us and we can't really do much about it but for me that
[Guest]: imagined world we're talking about that thing and and joking about that thing
[Guest]: kind of relieves the pain for me also and for probably someone who who has who
[Guest]: has the same feeling or who is kind of victim of that that act of violence or
[Guest]: aggression toh wo mera hamesha se wo jo shayad psychologically raha hai ki the
[Guest]: world of writing and world of books has been an escape from the bullying and
[Guest]: from all the other from the ordinariness of life to wo I want to create that
[Guest]: through whatever stories I tell and I always want to tell a story with some
[Guest]: sense of hope comedy is always hopeful cinema what I want to write and create
[Guest]: has to be hopeful in the sense okay there is you will at some point you know
[Guest]: kuch bhi hoga at some point you will be sitting by the bank of a river and a
[Guest]: boat will come and you can get on that boat and you will probably go across to
[Guest]: a better place so that has always been I think that is the leitmotif in a way
[Amit Varma]: I'm struck by what you say about wanting to get away like one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: songs as a young teenager was Tracy Chapman's fast car which is about exactly
[Amit Varma]: the same thing if you remember and I'm also struck by like my follow-up
[Amit Varma]: question comes from something that Amitabh Kumar wrote and I discussed it
[Amit Varma]: with him in an episode that we did together where he wrote about the scene
[Amit Varma]: from Rahim Azum Raza Zadagaon where you know just at the time of partition
[Amit Varma]: these young Muslim students have gone to a village and they're telling another
[Amit Varma]: Muslim hey you should come to Pakistan and I'll read that para out where Amitabh
[Amit Varma]: Kumar is describing what's in the book where he says in Raza Zadagaon the
[Amit Varma]: protest against a nation is being made in the name of the village when the
[Amit Varma]: fiercely well-educated Muslim students came to Gangauli to preach about
[Amit Varma]: partition and the necessity for the creation of a new nation of Pakistan the
[Amit Varma]: Muslim villagers are genuinely bewildered one of the villagers is a
[Amit Varma]: young man called Tanu who has returned from battle fighting for the British in
[Amit Varma]: the Second World War he argues against the urban visitors in the name of his
[Amit Varma]: village and these are now his words I am a Muslim but I love this village because
[Amit Varma]: I myself am this village I love this indigo warehouses tank and these mud
[Amit Varma]: lanes because they are different forms of myself on the battlefield when death
[Amit Varma]: came very near I certainly remembered Allah but instead of Mecca and or
[Amit Varma]: Karbala I remembered Gangauli right and lovely and and they move me so much and
[Amit Varma]: the question I asked Amitabh and which I was some of my guests since is what is
[Amit Varma]: your Gangauli and what is your Gangauli okay my Gangauli is probably not a
[Guest]: place but people voices sounds
[Guest]: maybe a Qawwali Punjabi Qawwali by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Biba Sada Dil Modde
[Guest]: or maybe just you know some piece of poetry by Dushyant Kumar or Mirza Ghalib
[Guest]: but so these are the things which I feel I belong to and these are the things
[Guest]: which I actually I probably at one point tweeted that when I die I'll miss the
[Guest]: food and the poetry the most so these are the two things I kind of belong to
[Guest]: food is again something which very I know it's a very
[Guest]: quotidian
[Guest]: but I kind of belong to food also and when I say food because for me food is
[Guest]: again another non-controversial bridge between people across you know places
[Guest]: like okay you may say Muslims should not live in this country but you still
[Guest]: when you go to Lucknow you go to the kebab shop and you eat you know and you
[Guest]: kind of you are consuming a culture which which is not not of today and
[Guest]: which is not of even I mean it's something which which has as Tony
[Guest]: Joseph in earlier yeah so has shown us it's not even 500 years old or 800 years
[Guest]: old it is probably 1.2 lakh years old the whole culture and how we came to
[Guest]: this land and how we all kind of arrived from different places and slowly built
[Guest]: this community and then someone came and kind of started making these different
[Guest]: tribes and then tribes turned into kingdoms and kingdoms turned into these
[Guest]: kind of this current modern nation state and their lines which we kind of
[Guest]: believe in but they don't exist so that all of these things kind of are
[Guest]: difficult to explain to people but these food is the most tangible and most
[Guest]: accessible part of that that entire history of human evolution which brought
[Guest]: us here with at some point you learned that you know lamb is really tasty if
[Guest]: you mince it and kind of cook it over over fire and all so these things I know
[Guest]: they don't probably they are not even a dent on on that on the mindsets of
[Guest]: people and whatever they will still keep on doing what they do or believing in
[Guest]: what they believe but it is still keeping the the symbols of that that
[Guest]: whatever culture alive and that will be there so well merely about even both
[Guest]: other value of the art of course poetry music some pieces of cinema and when I
[Guest]: said people again they're not I don't mean people in the sense okay Nusrat
[Guest]: Fathiali Khan it's just yeah the art they have created or the music they have
[Guest]: created or sometimes the food they have created or stories they have told me
[Guest]: some you know some some person I I mean I will remember that that lady in Egypt
[Guest]: we met on the road we were like in Cairo and I'm look last day to our
[Guest]: local flight believe me the use capella I'm looking for a
[Guest]: Abdul Koyedar named a baklava shop both Puranis I don't I saw something on it
[Guest]: or was it Koyedar Kiva has a baklava Lena Thorne look bought tension may take
[Guest]: him a punching a case of you give a gun to a packer case I'm on like a vagina and
[Guest]: there was no taxi on the road to take us to that place and randomly one cab
[Guest]: stopped and there was a lady inside one Egyptian lady and she saw us kind of
[Guest]: struggling and checking other cabs so she stopped and she said where are you
[Guest]: going and he said we have to go to that place and we are really like in today
[Guest]: and she's angry I'm good taxi name and she said come in I'll drop you and she
[Guest]: had to go somewhere else so first the cab took her to that place and then she
[Guest]: told the cab guy to take us to where we were supposed to go and when we arrived
[Guest]: there and we asked the cabbie get now and he said no she paid for your
[Guest]: distinct fare and you just get down and I'm waiting for you and I'll take you
[Guest]: back to the hotel and we waited and these are the strange things which I
[Guest]: will I mean which are my Bengali you know these experiences of life of with
[Guest]: sometimes with random strangers and like Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan is a stranger or
[Guest]: Kishore Kumar is a stranger or Muhammad Rafi is a stranger generally as a
[Guest]: person but yeah we know them through what they created or R.D. Burman or S.D.
[Guest]: Burman or you know Abidaparveen or whoever right now whoever has kind of
[Amit Varma]: enriched us. You mentioned Cairo and I'd asked a similar question to a previous
[Amit Varma]: guest of mine Max Rodenbeck who was brought up in Cairo and his answer was
[Amit Varma]: Cairo but not the Cairo of today Cairo the time you know Cairo of the time when
[Amit Varma]: he actually grew up and it's that kind of makes me think that perhaps we are
[Amit Varma]: building imaginary homes for ourselves like invisible cities like Alvino may
[Amit Varma]: have put it right it's like there's a beautiful phrase Sugata Srinivasa Raju
[Amit Varma]: used a few weeks back in an episode with me and the phrase was rooted
[Amit Varma]: cosmopolitanism and when I and that's how he kind of described himself and I
[Amit Varma]: felt it fit him so perfectly and I felt that that would be something to aspire to
[Amit Varma]: but I feel that that rootedness part is somehow missing that I'm kind of that
[Amit Varma]: that I'm rooted to these nebulous things like the ones you mentioned you know
[Amit Varma]: certain kinds of music certain kind of books and so on and so forth but there's
[Amit Varma]: nothing concrete there but anyway that is what it is and and this sort of
[Amit Varma]: reminds me of like another question that I sort of wanted to ask you about you
[Amit Varma]: know you spoke about how a lot of these music they carry memories you remember
[Amit Varma]: a particular memory comes back when you hear something and one of my writing
[Amit Varma]: students wrote a post beautiful newsletter post I link it from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes where he's talking about exactly this about music and memories and how
[Amit Varma]: they all come together but one part of his piece which I argued with was he
[Amit Varma]: said he loves his scene from Veer Zara where you know Veer and Zara are
[Amit Varma]: meeting at the absolute end and you see this wide-angle shot from across the
[Amit Varma]: courtroom and there is this music playing right and that always moves him
[Amit Varma]: a lot and the weird thing is when I saw it it moved me also but at the same time
[Amit Varma]: at an intellectual level I was thinking what shit is this I'm being spoon-fed
[Amit Varma]: like one of my sort of problems with Bollywood is that we are being
[Amit Varma]: condescended to all the time we are being spoon-fed key background music
[Amit Varma]: will tell you how to feel and things will be too overt and in Masan for
[Amit Varma]: example one of the things I liked was like with all good cinema is that you
[Amit Varma]: treating the viewer as an adult so you have those early scenes for example
[Amit Varma]: where Devi is sitting with a father in the room and there's no background music
[Amit Varma]: not a word is spoken is beautifully acted but you can you're letting the
[Amit Varma]: viewer do the work of putting themselves in those people's heads and imagining
[Amit Varma]: what they are going through in fact not to give spoilers away but everyone
[Amit Varma]: should have seen the film already and if they haven't please do but that last
[Amit Varma]: scene was interesting to me because I was thinking about the extreme
[Amit Varma]: approaches you could take to it you know when the two of them meet they go on a
[Amit Varma]: board they say a few words then you have that song which kind of drives home what
[Amit Varma]: is happening that you're leaving the past behind and taking something new and
[Amit Varma]: one minimal way of ending it perhaps would be that you just show the two of
[Amit Varma]: them on the steps and show nothing else and let the viewer fill in the gaps
[Amit Varma]: another one could be you just show them getting in the boat and not talking
[Amit Varma]: maybe a third one is a get in the boat and they're talking and but the music
[Amit Varma]: doesn't spell it out a fourth one is what you did a typical Bollywood film
[Amit Varma]: might even go further and add half an hour to the film till they are happily
[Amit Varma]: in love and all of that now I don't know what debates you had over that
[Amit Varma]: particular scene and how that came to be but what is very clear is that in this
[Amit Varma]: journey of yours you have now developed a sensitivity which is perhaps from
[Amit Varma]: world cinema perhaps from elsewhere I mean obviously from world cinema and
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere which is also very different with the tide the commercial tide the
[Amit Varma]: career tide that you're part of you're part of Bollywood you're working in the
[Amit Varma]: Bombay film industry they are the guys funding you and yet you have a
[Amit Varma]: sensibility which is different I mean a separate question is about the courage
[Amit Varma]: to go on a different path but first that sensibility is so how did this evolve
[Amit Varma]: because you grew up like you you mentioned in the 90s watching Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: blown away by Hum Aapke Hai Kaun you know feeling really bad that Renuka Shah
[Amit Varma]: died waiting till Monday you see her in Surabhi she's alive yeah from those
[Amit Varma]: kind of influences shaping you you almost come to this very different place
[Amit Varma]: so how did that sort of happen and and what was and did you like with that
[Amit Varma]: with that last scene you know taking it to exactly the point where there's a
[Amit Varma]: continuum of show don't tell that you could have done you know what were your
[Guest]: thoughts on that I'm very fascinated so ek toh mere liye I can't imagine a
[Guest]: viewer like I can't imagine the person I'm writing for I always imagine myself
[Guest]: I'm writing for myself to mere liye woh phir woh sawal nahi hota hai ki yeh
[Guest]: samajh aayega ki nahi mujhe samajh aa raha hai jitna bhi woh subtle hai aur infact
[Guest]: jitna zyada subtle hoga utna zyada lagta hai because so two things a
[Guest]: subtlety kyunki main apne liye likh raha hoon doosra woh brevity wala point jo
[Guest]: maine bola ki being very very optimal so jitne kam mein samajh aa jaye utna
[Guest]: achha hai jitne kam footage mein aur jitne kam whatever page count word
[Guest]: count mein samajh aa jaye koi cheez toh utna achha hai toh ek toh wo hai toh
[Guest]: wahan pe I I am writing for myself so there's no challenge of explaining or
[Guest]: over explaining things there's no you know need for that
[Guest]: doosra that sensitivity what we are talking about I think it probably is
[Guest]: from world cinema kyunki yes 90s mein aur till probably 2003 jab tak main
[Guest]: college mein tha maine proper commercial Hindi cinema aur commercial Bollywood
[Guest]: hollywood ke alawa kuch nahi dekha tha hollywood ke bhi jo matlab sabse yada
[Guest]: art house film maine dekhi hogi wo forest kam thi jo mere liye bahut badi
[Guest]: art house thi ki achha hai isme toh love story bhi zyada nahi hai isme toh ek
[Guest]: poora ek mannab the amount of detailing they were doing as compared to I'm
[Guest]: saying something like Notting Hill or you know something like what are the
[Guest]: films were there at that time like the Rambo or those kind of films jo hum
[Guest]: dekhte the college mein toh un sab ke saamne Forrest Gump looked like a very
[Guest]: art house kind of a film and then we found out okay it is like it is much
[Guest]: celebrated and award-winning kind of a film toh wahan se shayad ye hua achanak
[Guest]: se fayda ye hua ki jab Bombay aaya aur jab maine samjha ki okay mujhe khud se
[Guest]: mehnat karni hai aur khud se cheeze seekhni hai and then again the thing
[Guest]: about finding your voice or finding what you resonate with and you know kind of
[Guest]: interacting with everything on a very very deep level toh wahan se jab world
[Guest]: cinema discover kiya aur jab jo bhi ek us samay ka jo world cinema which was
[Guest]: mostly Iranian cinema at that time which was you know on the rise at that time
[Guest]: Majidi and you know Kirostami and Jaffar Panahi and so a lot of these people
[Guest]: were making cinema which was very realist and still not as alienating as
[Guest]: as the whatever the French New Wave of 50s jo ki humare liye ek alag culture
[Guest]: tha alienating mein isli bol raha hoon kyunki usme bohot saari cheeze thi jo
[Guest]: matlab humko mujhe nahi bahut daata samjha rahi thi jo theek hai wo achchi
[Guest]: filme hain aur ab dekhta hoon atna I can appreciate them for those nuances which
[Guest]: I kind of missed at that time because at that time I was looking for stories and
[Guest]: looking for relatability which was not at all there but us samay Iranian cinema
[Guest]: and some other Korean cinema of that time of the late early whatever late
[Guest]: aughties and wo jis tarah se influence kiya wo bhi us tarah se kyun kar paya
[Guest]: kyunki I was very obsessed with Bollywood of 90s matlab mein koi bhi super
[Guest]: commercial filme jo ki super violent also films like Loha and Farishte and
[Guest]: there was a film called I think Hindustan Ki Kasam and so us tarah ki jo bohot hi
[Guest]: ultra border gadar yeh sab filme mujhe bahut bahut kamaal ki lagti thi to at
[Guest]: least mera meri ek understanding wo jo cliche ki understanding thi wo wahan se
[Guest]: ban rahi thi dheere dheere ab phir uske baad jab yeh dekha toh it was first of
[Guest]: all it was it was a shock that the same impact can be had without music without
[Guest]: over-the-top acting without any flashy camera work and you just are kind of
[Guest]: living with people and and even I'm so films like Babel and Amore Spiros and
[Guest]: all which was a major influence for writing Masaan just the intercutting of
[Guest]: stories and having multiple stories and going into a world which is and going
[Guest]: with as much realism as possible and avoiding all because we were shooting in
[Guest]: Banaras Masaan we also had that fear ki we should not have that the typical
[Guest]: white gaze of exoticizing the place and Banaras is very easy to exoticize and
[Guest]: has those very touristy pictures all over the world which people know the
[Guest]: chhata on the Ghat and you know sadhus taking a dip in Ganges to wo cheezein
[Guest]: humko pata thi ki humko avoid karni hai and then we found some of the some of
[Guest]: the some of the templates in in world cinema and then at some point I also
[Guest]: discovered this new American cinema cinema of the 70s where you know killing
[Guest]: of a Chinese bookie and or even Scorsese ki jo realist filme thi us samay ki
[Guest]: Main Streets and Taxi Driver and all toh waha se phir ek aur aesthetic ka ek aur
[Guest]: rasta khula gayo ki you can still you can be cinematic and still be realist
[Guest]: jo ek jo Iranian cinema mein missing tha so there were these many many
[Guest]: influences and I was always kind of putting them in in that part and kind of
[Guest]: trying to make a recipe which was jo so of course all of it whatever I'm doing
[Guest]: till now I still don't have a voice mujhe apni mil gayi hai it's always work in
[Guest]: progress but wo Arun Kamal ki line hai ki poetry ki apna kya hai is jeevan mein
[Guest]: sab toh liya udhaar sara loha un logon ka apni keval dhaar so loha toh duniya
[Guest]: bhar se mila hai I'm just probably learning my craft of sharpening the loha
[Guest]: but yeah all of it is basically and which is probably true for art all the
[Guest]: time you always take what is around you or what has been before you and then you
[Guest]: try to interpret it in your own way
[Amit Varma]: so let's get back to biography but you know you've got this excellent interview
[Amit Varma]: with Nilesh Mishra the slow interview I linked that from the show notes that you
[Amit Varma]: know so I won't repeat any of that that you speak about your college years and
[Amit Varma]: how you worked for a year in Pune and then you kind of moved on from there but
[Amit Varma]: one strand that I want to kind of pick up on is something that you almost
[Amit Varma]: apologize for mentioning which is a love for food you know food and cooking and
[Amit Varma]: all of that so tell me a little bit about that because you are right that
[Amit Varma]: people will almost treat food like a guilty pleasure right and cooking as
[Amit Varma]: something you know not a great creative activity as such though you have you
[Amit Varma]: know in that interview I think you described you compared cooking with
[Amit Varma]: Buddhist mandala painting where you spend a lot of effort and you make
[Amit Varma]: something beautiful and then you wipe it off it's gone but you have the
[Amit Varma]: pleasure of the moment so how did you kind of get into cooking what were your
[Amit Varma]: processes like initially I guess we all learn by analogy right in that sense
[Amit Varma]: in that sense but then you think about first principles and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: and you start so is it something that kind of puts you in a state of flow as
[Amit Varma]: it were is it that kind of sense to it and do you feel that you know being a
[Amit Varma]: cook requires being a particular kind of person because it requires a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of patience and Tara when sometimes just sticking to the process like when I
[Amit Varma]: cook I find myself cooking things which I can make in 10 minutes right key steak
[Amit Varma]: banana your bacon and eggs banana and I just want to get it over in 10 minutes
[Amit Varma]: and I don't have the patience to put something on a low flame for one hour
[Amit Varma]: checking him you know I don't have that and I think that that also points to
[Amit Varma]: some character defect in me Kimoji at some level I want some immediate
[Amit Varma]: gratification I don't I'm impatient that Tara is not there and I wonder if that
[Amit Varma]: approach can then carry on to other things so what has been sort of your
[Amit Varma]: sense of cooking and does it gel with the kind of person you are or the kind
[Guest]: of qualities you wanted to build in yourself I don't know I won't look at
[Guest]: cooking or my whatever relationship with food in in those whatever in in those
[Guest]: economic terms in in a way key utilitarian type key house similar to
[Guest]: spider Hogan or would it could put money down there in the rest I mean it's just
[Guest]: I'm I think what so all of cinema also kind of evolved from the idea of magic
[Guest]: magic shows of the magic shows me only technically okay shadows buddy Hogan
[Guest]: gain people will think people will kind of be odd by it and stand by it to one
[Guest]: has your magic shows and most of the most of the early whatever cinema makers
[Guest]: were magicians before turning into filmmakers and so I like that kind of
[Guest]: thing about about you know elements the one thing transforming into another and
[Guest]: when you can facilitate it like in cinema you write something and then there
[Guest]: are hundred people who create that magic and make you believe that this actually
[Guest]: happened it's not like we shot this story and these are actors you are really
[Guest]: you know you believe okay this is Deepak this is whatever this is Amitabh but
[Guest]: this is coolie or whatever this is Vijay in the bar who is getting you know who
[Guest]: is about to be killed by his own brother and all that though Australia Joe Joe
[Guest]: make-believe or whatever suspension of disbelief capital looking it is not
[Guest]: really after a point you're not really suspending that disbelief you are
[Guest]: actually into it and you start believing in magic so same with food for me I just
[Guest]: love the process of one thing transforming into another something
[Guest]: which is completely inedible in one form and 10 minutes later you put chemicals
[Guest]: into it and like in a certain proportion and add fire to it and it transforms
[Guest]: into something which is so beautiful and so beautiful not just to look at yet to
[Guest]: taste and it nourishes you so food for me is a form of meditation not just
[Guest]: cooking but eating also when I eat food I give proper whatever attention to
[Guest]: every element and I eat slowly to me really a was Sarah process it not Jadu
[Guest]: a Kana Kanika existence car and I always and I still love it's biologically easy
[Guest]: to explain why we eat food and how we digest it and all but it's very strange
[Guest]: that living beings have this hunger so on many elements the idea of food is
[Guest]: magical for me from a biological point of view from from a very basic you know
[Guest]: the mechanics part of it of putting things together and then the history or
[Guest]: historical perspective to it because he's gonna say I'm already pass I hear
[Guest]: what do you think so there's always this these elements which are affecting
[Guest]: your food on a day-to-day basis and then that food is affecting you on a day-to-day
[Guest]: basis so for me all these small details about food generally are very very
[Guest]: fascinating very interesting and I can so just a little museum boom thing kissy
[Guest]: share my jacket man share the subsequent video subsequent day a man doting and a
[Guest]: RRM sevon beta sector or just looking at food or or a girl but I could grocery
[Guest]: store here foreign jacket merely a America or Dubai Jambi wangka subsequent
[Guest]: eating part actually won't give you supermarkets hotel as fascinating as I
[Guest]: would say the American the Natural History Museum
[Guest]: a clock so I'll put on a dinosaur who tonight fascinating Mary Lee Wangka
[Guest]: traders joy or whole foods or get out there jumpy no no cheesy or tea and I'm
[Guest]: like constantly fascinated kia chai on Pachastar a kid do them a record haka
[Guest]: dictum case mean kya hai ala goose say toh who have fear at a cooking a process
[Guest]: which is always a challenge because I don't cook with with measurements I
[Guest]: always want to be intuitive about it and Koby cheese may agar Jokey may coffee
[Guest]: zada banata on Koby cheese and a pulav a me both barb and I tell you pasta
[Guest]: both barb and I tell I try to kind of I kind of I make sure key yeh wala pulav
[Guest]: manipulate of a new banana or Agarman manly jeopardy that's all me agar
[Guest]: many saw bar pulav banaya to a socket saw a lagoon a coin a coin gradient
[Guest]: a lagoon a coin a coin is cup process a lagoon a kind of a return a lagoon a
[Guest]: kind of a rose core pura pakani cut time a lag diya jayega kai bar usme Pura
[Guest]: element replace karke chawal ki jagge I'll put something else and still try to
[Guest]: achieve the same quality of texture and all the world both sorry cheesing I keep
[Guest]: playing with it and it's always a kind of challenge it's like I don't play
[Guest]: video games but this is my video game where I create challenges and then try
[Guest]: to accelerate it and it puts me in as you said it definitely puts me in a flow
[Guest]: state where I'm cut off from the rest of the world there is sometimes there is
[Guest]: music playing and all I like playing music while I'm cooking but that music
[Guest]: is only in the background but I always like to be involved seriously in this
[Guest]: alchemy which is a day-to-day alchemy we are we are kind of blessed with and then
[Guest]: of course cherish the food mood a khana banana we bought present a kilana we
[Guest]: bought present a lakin unfortunately a lot of people you know in fact most of
[Guest]: the people don't really give whatever that kind of serious attention to food
[Guest]: no matter how much effort you put in and no matter how many times you tell them
[Guest]: you're put in lots of effort so it kind of becomes slightly frustrating to feed
[Guest]: people because very few people actually you know interact with with the various
[Guest]: changes or whatever the ingredients in the way you have kind of very
[Guest]: thoughtfully put in this method awesome in a garlic fry Karkidala is the
[Guest]: little I keep collecting the
[Guest]: infact is your state maybe even if I go to Chhattisgarh or to Himachal or
[Guest]: Kashmir or wherever try to bring local fresh produce to a bar who I am a bar
[Guest]: and American think on Saturday boss Nepal Australia Arrata tomato Kaka
[Guest]: put a key-up it just needs on a look after rain appear bad middle firm in a
[Guest]: concerned teacher came here Roman can allow the party on the shuttle a
[Guest]: volunteer an animal family when a woman is echeuropotenasty them manipulate hi
[Guest]: beer to me once the do kill all I'll look the root like a tamar,
[Guest]: from most of the places, the potatoes there are local.
[Guest]: Because potatoes are locally grown everywhere.
[Guest]: It's not a thing which kind of grows centrally in India.
[Guest]: It grows everywhere and has a different taste everywhere.
[Guest]: Rice is fine. It grows in 2-3 places in the belt.
[Guest]: It grows there and goes all over India.
[Guest]: Potatoes are local.
[Guest]: It is easy to get potatoes.
[Guest]: It stays for a long time.
[Guest]: And the other thing which I get from different countries is the noodles there.
[Guest]: Because that again is something which every culture has their own kind of noodles
[Guest]: and the noodle instant mix they create.
[Guest]: So, the local fast food noodles or any other kind,
[Guest]: because the world is kind of, suddenly the market has woken up to that people want
[Guest]: what are the supplement, health, healthy alternatives to everything.
[Guest]: All kind of carbs.
[Guest]: So, because of that they are creating lots of new stuff and I like that.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned, you know, sometimes replacing the rice in your pulao with something else.
[Amit Varma]: And I remembered I was in Athens earlier this year
[Amit Varma]: and we were just walking on the road.
[Amit Varma]: So, we were damn tired, too tired to go to Google and look up what is a high rated restaurant or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So, we just saw, there was a small quiet hole in the wall kind of place called Elevoro which we entered.
[Amit Varma]: And I just, I was too tired to look at the menu properly.
[Amit Varma]: I ordered something called a Veal Kritharaki.
[Amit Varma]: One of the best dishes I have ever had.
[Amit Varma]: And Kritharaki apparently is a kind of pasta which looks like rice.
[Guest]: Okay, I have seen that part.
[Amit Varma]: I think even the Italians have a version called Orzo or something.
[Amit Varma]: But this was a Greek version and it wasn't the Veal itself.
[Amit Varma]: It was just a Kritharaki and it was all the veg preparation with tomatoes and different things.
[Amit Varma]: And it was so incredibly delicious.
[Amit Varma]: My friend was in Athens after a week.
[Amit Varma]: He asked me where to eat.
[Amit Varma]: I said, go here, order this.
[Amit Varma]: He ordered that and later messaged me and said, Amit, the best rice I have ever had.
[Amit Varma]: So, in that particular meal, I loved so much, I was mindful through every bite.
[Amit Varma]: But my other thing I try to watch out for is sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: I am like many of your guests you are complaining about when you feed them.
[Amit Varma]: That I am just absent-minded.
[Amit Varma]: I am lost in conversation or I am reading something and I won't even notice the food.
[Amit Varma]: Like you put a meat dish in front of me, I will eat the whole thing.
[Amit Varma]: You will ask if it was lamb or mutton.
[Amit Varma]: And I won't remember because I would have not paid attention to that.
[Unknown]: And that is something I try to fight.
[Amit Varma]: And you have mentioned and meditation is a way of fighting that.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned that cooking is like meditation.
[Amit Varma]: Do you consciously try to bring that quality of being mindful to the present moment and other things also to things you do?
[Amit Varma]: Is it something that has happened over time or you were always like this?
[Guest]: No, I think it has happened over time.
[Guest]: Because at some point, I think I realized in those initial years of trying to be a writer.
[Guest]: I realized two things.
[Guest]: One, there is nothing called merit or God-gifted talent or something like that.
[Guest]: There is only one thing that is discipline.
[Guest]: And it's only discipline which can create magic and make it look effortless.
[Guest]: So, from there, I started paying attention to every little thing.
[Guest]: Except maybe the only thing I still don't pay attention to is the clothes I wear.
[Guest]: Clothes I kind of select or buy or something.
[Guest]: In that, my mind still doesn't work.
[Guest]: I have not interacted with that world at all.
[Guest]: But otherwise, yes, food, reading, listening to music, watching movies, walking in a city, something I completely love.
[Guest]: I just love walking.
[Guest]: Even in Bombay, I have walked so many times in those six years period, especially 2004 to 2010.
[Guest]: I would walk from this place, four bungalows or Andheri, Versova to Kandivali East, almost three hours of walking, 12 kilometers or so.
[Guest]: And it was very, very cathartic and very, very kind of it would put me in a zone.
[Guest]: Suddenly, the traffic, it was traffic jammed like end to end at that time and there was so much noise on the street.
[Guest]: But it still would put me in a very peaceful state of mind, just walking.
[Guest]: And always there's something new to see on the road.
[Guest]: Always there are even the same road, same whatever locations.
[Guest]: And every day there would be so many new experiences.
[Guest]: And those experiences were so fulfilling for me.
[Guest]: And they still are.
[Guest]: I mean, I still make it a point to walk as much as I can in the city.
[Guest]: Though Bombay is one of probably the worst cities to walk in, in terms of there are no walking spaces.
[Guest]: The traffic is bad.
[Guest]: It's so polluted and really there are no pavements left.
[Guest]: There are pavements, but then there is so much encroachment happening.
[Guest]: And then encroachment is also kind of a systemic, this thing that they are not given enough space where they can actually put up their stalls.
[Guest]: So they are on the pavement.
[Guest]: And people are generally very rude to or unmindful of pedestrians.
[Guest]: It's very difficult to cross the road when you have a signal, even if the signal is red for vehicles and you have that green walking sign.
[Guest]: Even at that time, you are afraid that someone or the other can hit you.
[Guest]: Because a lot of people, especially at that time, want to go fast.
[Guest]: So it has happened a couple of times where I have kind of been lucky to not been, I have been hit while walking on the road.
[Guest]: And I kind of had like a mini fracture in my rib because someone hit me, a vehicle and all.
[Guest]: So all that has happened, but of course, it's part of whatever it is, part of living in India.
[Guest]: So no complaints, but otherwise, yeah, I want to kind of be mindful of every moment in every way.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of questions rolled into one in the sense a couple of themes I've explored in the past.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is I was chatting with, I had breakfast with a friend of mine in Bangalore, who's also a friend of yours.
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you who after this episode.
[Amit Varma]: And he's a CXO position person at a major company.
[Amit Varma]: And he was complaining that when he goes out for dinner or lunch with his colleagues, who are all senior people in the company, there's nothing to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: Because they don't read books, they don't watch movies, there's no interior life.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is, you know, the straight and narrow, what they kind of do.
[Amit Varma]: Which also leads me to thinking is that by a process of self selection, the people we choose to hang out with, we often imagine that everybody is like us, that they're into books and music and they have that kind of interior life.
[Amit Varma]: And but a lot of people, you know, simply don't.
[Amit Varma]: And this is one strand.
[Amit Varma]: And the other strand is something I've brought up because it's made me introspect a lot, which is this book I read called Wanting by Luke Burgess, where the primary theme of the book is that a lot of what we want.
[Amit Varma]: And he got this concept from a philosopher called Rene Girard, who was asked to teach a class on literature a few decades ago.
[Amit Varma]: And he was a philosopher.
[Amit Varma]: But he said, okay, I'll do it.
[Amit Varma]: He read the books he was supposed to read.
[Amit Varma]: And he found that all the characters in those books, they wanted something only because somebody else wanted it.
[Amit Varma]: So he coined the term mimetic desire.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So a mimetic desire would be that I want a Mercedes because, you know, it's a done thing.
[Amit Varma]: Or a young person may say, I want to get married and have kids.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's the expected route.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And the term Burgess used for this was thick desires and thin desires.
[Amit Varma]: So thick desires are something that you intrinsically want deep inside.
[Unknown]: It's coming from nowhere.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously creature comforts are taken for granted.
[Amit Varma]: So we're not talking about eating and all.
[Amit Varma]: Thin desires are desires which come from something around you, like the Mercedes, like the I want to get married and have kids kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: Those are thin desires.
[Amit Varma]: And the strange thing is that thin desires can be really intense.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And thick desires can be hidden in the background.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't even know what it is.
[Amit Varma]: For example, when you're a young writer, the thin desire could be that I want to be a writer.
[Amit Varma]: You're chasing the glamour of writing.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: That I'll get this prize, he'll do that, people will come to listen to me.
[Amit Varma]: But hidden behind that, there might be also a thick desire to write, to create, to tell stories and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when you talk about your time in Pune, where you worked in a software company, Canvay, for a few months,
[Amit Varma]: and you pointed out that what made you decide to leave was when you looked at all your seniors who have worked there for 10 years,
[Amit Varma]: and you said, in 10 years, I am this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you fought that thin desire, that I'll have a flat, a family, this and that.
[Amit Varma]: You fought that thin desire, and you went out to look for something else.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very hard, I think, when we are young, and I find it hard to answer even now,
[Amit Varma]: though I can do it much better than I could have 10 years ago, that what are our thick desires?
[Amit Varma]: Because most people don't have to go back to the first strand, that interior life,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, that possibility of self-reflecting.
[Amit Varma]: Who am I? What do I want? Why do I want the things that I do?
[Amit Varma]: Why am I sort of on this path?
[Amit Varma]: You know, and again, these two seem connected to me for that reason.
[Amit Varma]: So, what is your sense? Because you had that self-reflection to be able to take a step back,
[Amit Varma]: to look at these people and say, I don't want to be like this, I don't want this.
[Amit Varma]: And you could also then not join the FTIR course you got in for because you were like, no, I don't want this.
[Amit Varma]: So, if you have to think about your thick desires, like, you know, maybe 10 years later, you wake up in the morning,
[Amit Varma]: what do you do? And that's perhaps a superficial question.
[Amit Varma]: You can tell me surface things like, I will cook pulao in my 190th recipe or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, when you think of your thick desires, you know, an outsider can guess,
[Amit Varma]: that there will be storytelling, but how do you look at this?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure you've thought about variants of this question for yourself.
[Guest]: No, I have not actually. For me, I can't even think about tomorrow.
[Guest]: So, that's a bit of, I don't know, it's a handicap or something or a blessing, I don't know.
[Guest]: But for me, it's always difficult to see the future.
[Guest]: So, whatever the desire is, it's very, it's just making sure that the present is present for me.
[Guest]: And in my childhood, I had a desire to become a writer.
[Guest]: But those are very, very broad kind of desires, that I want to go into writing.
[Guest]: There was probably at some point, the idea of glamour also, that there is a film industry.
[Guest]: After that, when I came here, the glamour of the film industry must have gone away in a week.
[Guest]: But there was always that thing that you can write and create a magic.
[Guest]: Where it is again, all of these processes, cooking or writing, both are equally magical processes,
[Guest]: where you are just black ink on white paper, and you are transported to another world,
[Guest]: and you start seeing these images in your head, and you start caring for people who don't even exist,
[Guest]: who are in someone else's head, and you are caring for them, and you're crying for them.
[Guest]: So, I read Gunahon Ka Devta for the first time, Dharamveer Bharti's epic, one of the most celebrated novels in Hindi.
[Guest]: So, I started reading Gunahon Ka Devta in college, I was probably in second year.
[Guest]: And there were going to be holidays, I started reading during the exam time.
[Guest]: I couldn't put it down during the exams also,
[Guest]: at that time I was quite into, I didn't want to, flunk is a far-fetched thing,
[Guest]: I didn't want to be below the top three rankers in the class, so I wanted to be among the top three.
[Guest]: And I was studying very seriously at that time,
[Guest]: even then I got the novel in my hand, and I started reading, and through the exam,
[Guest]: I was preparing for two hours at night, after that I took out an hour and was reading,
[Guest]: and the exam got over, and there were some 20-25 pages left at the end, and at some point I didn't want to finish,
[Guest]: I was like, if it gets over, then what will I do, but I cared so much for Sudha and Chandra, the characters.
[Guest]: And when the last 20-25 pages were left, that day I had to take the Lucknow train from Banaras,
[Guest]: so I thought, okay, let's do it, let's go home, I'll read in the train.
[Guest]: And when the train got over, I was at Top Birds, the Kashi-Vishwanath Express used to run from Banaras,
[Guest]: and there was a box in that train, S6, which used to be called Lucknow-Bhogi,
[Guest]: and all its reservations were from Lucknow, the Lucknow-Delhi train, so it was Banaras-Delhi train.
[Guest]: So that box used to get empty in Banaras-Lucknow, so most of the students used to go in that,
[Guest]: taking a non-reserved ticket in a reserved bogie, because it was empty till Lucknow.
[Guest]: So I was sitting on top of that, and that novel got over, and it stabbed me like anything,
[Guest]: when it ended on the note, and on the note it ended.
[Guest]: And probably for the next two hours of the journey, I was crying like I have lost a very close friend in an accident,
[Guest]: like I was in shock, I was in pain, I cried for two hours, and people, so many people were concerned,
[Guest]: were strangers, they kept asking me what happened, then probably at some point they made up their own reasons,
[Guest]: that maybe there was a break-up, maybe something happened, maybe there was a tragedy at home,
[Guest]: I couldn't even explain to them that I am crying because of this book in my hand.
[Guest]: But at that point, I kind of, I think subconsciously at least, I figured that this is a very powerful medium,
[Guest]: storytelling, and I want to be a part of this tribe that can create these very strong emotions,
[Guest]: and give them, give people some kind of catharsis, maybe this line,
[Guest]: Kaun rota hai, kisi aur ki khati rahe do, sabko apni kisi baat pe rona aaya.
[Guest]: So ultimately, you are, probably I was crying for some other, whatever, my own traumas,
[Guest]: but it was connected to Sudhan Chandra's journey, and so to be able to be an entertainer,
[Guest]: and a therapist, and a magician at the same time, I think it was something which I found slowly,
[Guest]: I kind of figured that's really, really fascinating and good challenge to have in life.
[Guest]: So probably that was the only thick desire I can kind of talk about, I can think of ki haan, wo tha shayad.
[Guest]: Uske alawa mujhe nahi pata aur thin desires, I kind of, I'm aware of, and I'm constantly like pushing them back.
[Guest]: I know ki theek hai, car jab mene dekha ki sabke paas car hai, toh phir mere dimaag ne bola ki car toh kitne logon ke paas hai.
[Guest]: Toh car acquire karna toh bekaar, matlab ekdum hi bekaar ka ambition hai,
[Guest]: kyonki wo toh itne logon ke paas hai ki, of course, not all of them really,
[Guest]: if car is something you get only when you deserve it, I don't think so many people deserve having a car.
[Guest]: So then it's, there is a problem in the calculation or in what the theory is that car is a symbol of success.
[Guest]: My parents still think that, they keep asking me, car kab loge hai, abhi ghar le liya tumne, car le lo,
[Guest]: because in their head it is still incomplete, that picture of whatever, their idea of success.
[Guest]: Ki theek hai, baaki sab cheezein, aap kuchh likh rahe hain and you are happy in what you are doing, but that symbol is still attached.
[Guest]: Similarly, for kids, like having a kid, we decided not to have kids because, again,
[Guest]: that's probably the easiest thing to do in the world and everyone has, you know,
[Guest]: whatever has procreated through generations and that's why we are here.
[Guest]: But it's definitely, I don't even understand, car, I can still understand as a symbol of success in some ways.
[Guest]: How does having a kid, of course, I mean, there are people who might feel fulfilled and who might really feel that way,
[Guest]: but to attach a sense of failure or incompletion to people who don't have kids by choice or by whatever,
[Guest]: by some kind of compulsions is a very strange idea to take root.
[Guest]: I don't understand how that is a failure if something which can be done so easily biologically,
[Guest]: how is that a major achievement if it's just one molecule of semen interacting with one molecule of ova.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the themes I think about sometimes is how we are the only animals who are wired to fight their own wiring.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, we are programmed in certain ways to have kids, do this, do that, but we are also wired to be rational.
[Amit Varma]: That's one level above that. And we can fight our own wiring. We can decide that I won't be tribal.
[Amit Varma]: I won't have kids. I won't have whatever. I once wrote a provocative column about why it is immoral to have children.
[Amit Varma]: That was a headline and the kind of trolling I got from parents everywhere who took it personally,
[Amit Varma]: which I didn't, you know, kind of expect that way.
[Amit Varma]: It's, you know, it's a backlash of what Paul Graham calls the aggressively conventional minded,
[Amit Varma]: which is a phrase I love, aggressively conventional minded.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, you know, we've got like 20 minutes left. I feel like we should talk for another five, six hours,
[Amit Varma]: but I know you got to get back home and all of that. I want to talk about, you know, you mentioned 2006 to 2010,
[Amit Varma]: what you learned in those years, your struggle in Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also sort of interested in different places where you have spoken about, say, firstly, the centrality of Satya.
[Amit Varma]: You've said that if there was no Satya, there would be no Masaan.
[Amit Varma]: Because ripple effect ki tarah Satya se a certain kind of filmmaking was enabled and Anurag Kashyap came out of that.
[Amit Varma]: And Anurag Kashyap was a big part in nurturing his own little ecosystem of people.
[Amit Varma]: Both you and Neeraj worked with him and met through there.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, this is a question I often ask historians on my show, but it seems pertinent to ask you as well that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Thomas Carlyle came up with what he called the great man theory of history, which is very contentious.
[Amit Varma]: Great man theory of history is that history is made by great men and in Carlyle's time, obviously, great men, but you get it, great people.
[Amit Varma]: That somebody comes and changes everything and history proceeds differently.
[Amit Varma]: And people who criticize this theory say that, no, it's wrong that we are giving too much importance to individuals.
[Amit Varma]: Jo hona tha, hona tha, you know, trends go in a particular direction and then whatever has to happen has to happen.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when I think of individuals through history, like I won't use great in a qualitative sense, like great, great, but people who've had a big impact.
[Amit Varma]: I think individuals and accidents play a huge part.
[Amit Varma]: Ki, you know, satya was perhaps something that came about because of a bunch of different circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had an episode on Uday Bhatia on satya as well.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe there were other lucky accidents which could have taken us in a different direction, which didn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: Or some could make that argument ki ye to hona hi tha, satya nahi hota toh aur kuchh hota.
[Amit Varma]: Anurag nahi aata toh kuchh aur hota. Or he would have been enabled by something else.
[Amit Varma]: Toh ye sab ho hi jaata.
[Amit Varma]: So, couple of questions. And the first question is that broadly, what do you think of this?
[Amit Varma]: Because I feel that too often we don't appreciate how random everything is.
[Amit Varma]: Right? Aapne pehle merit ki baat ki. You know, good things will happen.
[Amit Varma]: People will say aarey maine kiya aur bad things will happen. They'll let it get them down.
[Amit Varma]: Self-esteem effect ho jaata hai. Whereas actually 99% of everything is sheer dumb luck.
[Amit Varma]: Right? Toh ye bhi do lucky cheez ho gaye. Unke ye impacts huye.
[Amit Varma]: It is not that there is a larger teleological narrative ki, you know, ki ek plan hai.
[Amit Varma]: Toh aapke kya thoughts hai iske baare mein?
[Guest]: Yes, I do believe strongly in the randomness of things rather than like you could have planned like certain things.
[Guest]: And I think ek aur cheez jo main, about cinema I say, but probably true for almost all the things in life.
[Guest]: Good films happen always by accident. Bad films happen always by design.
[Guest]: Beautiful.
[Guest]: You always, like, agar aapko film banane mein bahut, agar aapne bola, bahut mahinat ki hai, toh phir aapne shayad kharab film hi banayi hai. Kyunki mahinat se nahi banti hai.
[Guest]: In fact, kharab film banane mein zyada mahinat lagti hai. Main ye bhi maanta hu.
[Guest]: Achi film banane mein kam mahinat lagti hai. Because again, luck is on your side.
[Guest]: And then there are many, many factors you can't control.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's the time, sometimes it's so many like things which happen.
[Guest]: And I'm again using film as an example of or as a parallel to our real life because there are so many elements which help create a person like someone is called great.
[Guest]: But how does that great happen?
[Guest]: Because there are so many factors which are completely out of control of that great person which made them great.
[Guest]: Toh randomness kaafi zyada hai universe mein.
[Guest]: And just because we can't, that's one part of our wiring, which is still, I think, primitive.
[Guest]: We don't accept randomness.
[Guest]: We are baffled by it and we want to find patterns.
[Guest]: And those patterns have created, so that search for patterns has given rise to this idea of people we trust.
[Guest]: And then those people we trust, mostly historians or, you know, who have found patterns and who select certain patterns to say, OK, certain things were great or certain men were great.
[Guest]: And then those people then create further patterns which are, let's say, the great people effecting great changes.
[Guest]: So, mera toh wahi maanna hai.
[Guest]: Aur ussi wajah se again that idea of merit is highly, it's not just flawed, it's completely, I would say, bullshit, the idea of merit.
[Guest]: Kyunki bahut saara usme luck hai. Aur phir luck ke baad aapko discipline, you can be disciplined only if you're lucky.
[Guest]: Like if you are really working, you know, 20 hours a day, you can't really, you know, be lucky or you can't really be disciplined.
[Guest]: Agar aapko writer banna hai, lekin aapka janam hi aise ghar mein hua hai, jahan pe aapke paas kitabe hi nahi hai.
[Guest]: Mere paas 8 saal, 6 saal ki umar se kitabe aayi. Aur main tab se padh raha hu.
[Guest]: And I've had a fairly comfortable life in terms of financial access to things and all kinds of language access to things.
[Guest]: Toh phir maine discipline usme se dhund liya aur main wo kar paya.
[Guest]: If someone who still wanted to be a writer, first of all, people to get the idea that you can be a writer is also part of my luck.
[Guest]: Luck of being born in a particular family at a particular time when, you know, and then whatever life path was given to me through, again, multiple factors.
[Guest]: So all of it is, I think, quite random.
[Amit Varma]: And the desire to seek patterns also gives us religions and conspiracy theories and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of Bollywood, my sort of second question, because in a sense, you said that, you know, the 90s was a tumultuous decade.
[Amit Varma]: So much changed in the world, so much progress, analog to digital and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the current times in terms of what is happening to culture and cinema and all that is also momentous when you think about the pace of change.
[Amit Varma]: Because what I see happening in different domains in the world and happening less fast in cinema, but also in cinema is what I referred to before the crumbling away of the mainstream.
[Amit Varma]: Like in media, we have seen ki 1990s mein there was a consensus on the truth broad.
[Amit Varma]: There were your major publications and there was a lot of negative associated with that also because there were gatekeepers for art and artists and access was controlled.
[Amit Varma]: And now, of course, there is no consensus on the truth.
[Amit Varma]: We are engaged in narrative battles all the time.
[Amit Varma]: That's a negative side of the ledger.
[Amit Varma]: I would still say the positive side overwhelms that in the sense that all of us have the means of production.
[Amit Varma]: We don't have to go through gatekeepers.
[Amit Varma]: We can do crazy things which would never get past a gatekeeper earlier, like five hour podcasts and just keep doing it till we refine what we are doing.
[Amit Varma]: And the mainstream has kind of crumbled away there.
[Amit Varma]: We see it, I believe, even in nation states where lines on a map are becoming less relevant in a globalized world.
[Amit Varma]: And I see it happening everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in cinema also, I feel like it is just a matter of time because what you really have coming from, say, any film industry.
[Amit Varma]: If you look at Bollywood coming from Bombay, you have a film industry run by a few people almost in a central planning kind of way.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't really get the country.
[Amit Varma]: They are either kind of driven by narrow business imperatives, but they don't understand the people behind the numbers.
[Amit Varma]: Or they are, you know, foreign educated kids in elite film families and they've kind of taken over that family business, but they don't get it later either.
[Amit Varma]: Which is why I love TikTok so much. I thought it was such a tragedy that it was banned because I saw it as such a great platform,
[Amit Varma]: the kind of art from villages and towns and people of alternate sexualities expressing themselves and seeing other people like themselves where there is no gatekeeper.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought after that initial phase of, you know, you're going with a meme and you're lip syncing to something,
[Amit Varma]: after that initial phase, I saw some really cutting edge stuff coming out of there and it's a great tragedy it is in there.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, when we look at, and I don't even want to say cinema because that feels like it's putting it in a box,
[Amit Varma]: but that whole, all of audiovisual entertainment, storytelling per se, you know, where do you sort of see the future going?
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want you to be a forecaster and tell me that this will happen in 2035 and I will be here and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But just in general, what are the sort of trends that you see, what worries you, what gives you hope about the way this world is emerging and what excites you as a creator?
[Guest]: Okay. So yeah, generally, I think as whatever, generally humans are really bad at predicting future.
[Guest]: And I'm even worse at it because I can't really see, I can't, whatever, my brain kind of collapses when I start thinking, okay, what's going to happen next?
[Guest]: So, seriously, what excites me is this very fast changing world around us and this clash of multiple centers of power.
[Guest]: And this very contrasting thing about globalized world and then the rise of right wing, rise of this, you know, xenophobia around the world.
[Guest]: So, it will be as whatever Chinese say, interesting times. So, that is what kind of excites me that there will be lots to talk about, lots to reflect on, lots to analyze and make sense of.
[Guest]: Because things are not getting simple. We are kind of getting, no matter, of course, times have always been turbulent and times are always look, they always look more complicated than they were previously.
[Guest]: But if that is true, and I think that is true, the world is kind of getting more and more complicated because more and more gates have come down around the world.
[Guest]: And the kind of interactions that are possible now, and that is something which gives me great hope also.
[Guest]: That this idea that some people in power can restrict what you think or what you eat, that's not possible anymore.
[Guest]: No matter how much power they put in, no matter what, you know, they can't do anything. I have complete faith in that.
[Guest]: Because now what has happened, the doors have opened, people have seen a lot of things, you can't take back that power from them.
[Guest]: Okay, what has not reached them, maybe you can stop it, some things, some ideas.
[Guest]: But what has reached them, and they are too many, the ideas that have reached people, the idea of expressing the free expression, that has reached people.
[Guest]: And that is something which is now very difficult. You can probably control, which is what they will try to say, that you can say things, but say this particular thing.
[Guest]: But to convince people that you can't say anything, that is not going to happen.
[Guest]: So that gives me great hope because this has happened.
[Guest]: Okay, internet has been a great tool for the powerful people around the world in polarizing and pushing down their agenda very quickly and very effectively.
[Guest]: But at the same time, they don't understand that right now, the medium itself is a bigger message than the message they are giving.
[Guest]: And the medium is getting empowered, the medium of quick, effective communication, that medium has reached people.
[Guest]: And that means everyone will at some point find their voice and find their cause and find through the clutter or through the orders that this is what we want to say.
[Guest]: And we will say it because we have the medium and that medium is free and that medium is free to whatever, with all the caveats around the word free.
[Guest]: But that is generally a hopeful thing for me.
[Guest]: And secondly, as a writer, it is very exciting to make sense of these things and to find stories that kind of become a symbol of this clash, which we are seeing around us.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so you know, we've kind of come to the end of our allotted time, but I'm going to hopefully, if there's a listener demand, you will come back for a part two at some point, maybe when your film is out.
[Amit Varma]: Because I wanted to talk about your time in comedy, the craft of comedy, the craft of writing lyrics, the craft of writing screenplays, and much more about cinema.
[Amit Varma]: Because hopefully, by the time your next recording with me, you'll be, you know, your directorial debut will be out also.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm really excited about that.
[Amit Varma]: But my last question, and this is a question I ask all my guests, particularly interesting with you is, can you recommend books, films, music that have meant a lot to you at an emotional level?
[Amit Varma]: Like the kind of things you take to a desert island, that cliched question, or the kind of things you want to stand in a soapbox and you want to tell the world,
[Guest]: can the world's boss read this or watch this or listen to this?
[Guest]: That's also a bit of a problem, but maybe top of my mind, whatever comes to mind, I'll keep talking about it. So music, the golden age of Hindi cinema music is the 50s and 60s till mid 70s kind of a thing.
[Guest]: The music of the 70s has been a very defining part of my life. Because of that, I have learned lyrics writing.
[Guest]: I have learned through it and it has been so much in my mind and heart since childhood that that's something which pushes me to do better as a lyrics writer.
[Guest]: Because a lot of people say, it's a general belief, it's not wrong, that poetry was very good at that time.
[Guest]: But a lot of people don't understand and don't realize how that music is still alive.
[Guest]: There may be a lot of people who don't recognize how SD Burman used to look or this song is by SD Burman or Shankar Jayakrishnan or C Ramchandra.
[Guest]: It may be difficult for people to tell, but the music has survived and music has persisted. And in many cases, it has grown in value and impact.
[Guest]: But what a lot of people don't realize is that not only the quality of the poetry was not good, but the technical aspect was also very correct.
[Guest]: So the meter of the song, the phrasing of the song at that time, there is a meter, which is an English understanding of meter, which comes from Western music or Western poetry.
[Guest]: But Hindi film music is a very unique form of music in itself.
[Guest]: I feel it should be treated as a very well-defined, respected genre of music as like Carnatic music or Hindustani classical or Western music or jazz or any other form of music which we consider to be a respected genre.
[Guest]: So Hindi film music is a very unique form of music in itself.
[Guest]: It has all kinds of musical influences. That's fine. That's a different part of history. I'm just talking about poetry.
[Guest]: For this, if a tune has been given, now this is the tune, on which the lyrics of Gaata Rahe Mera Dil have been written, it will only be in the minds of people that only the words have been paid attention to, that Gaata Rahe Mera Dil.
[Guest]: But when the poet has written it, then the mouth will open twice in Gaata, then it will not open in Rahe, then it will open on Mera and it will not open in Dil.
[Guest]: That understanding is also there embedded in the music of 50s, 60s and 70s. The understanding of what the exact phrasing for that particular tune is and how that tune will be enhanced by this phrasing.
[Guest]: And instead of Gaata Rahe Mera Dil, you can also write Haasta Rahe Mera Dil in the meter. And it will sit, it will almost sit. Haasta Rahe Mera Dil or Jeeta Rahe Mera Dil.
[Guest]: But because of Gaata Rahe Mera Dil, the beauty of that song increases, which takes the poetry of that time to a different level, which again is part of the poetry but not the front of it.
[Guest]: People only, you know, if you get into the technicals of it, then you'll understand. So for me, that era is a very emotional attachment, but just as a lyrics writer to be part of that legacy,
[Guest]: it kind of keeps telling me to not be frivolous about it, to always be very, very sure of what you write and what you put out.
[Guest]: So all the music of that era, I would say, if anyone wants to listen to new music or those who have listened to it a little, they can interact with it very carefully and very well.
[Guest]: Then there is another Punjabi music, which is probably from the 70s, 80s, the era of Surinder Kaur and Asa Singh Mastana and then the Pakistani music of that time,
[Guest]: which was Mehdi Hasan and Ghulam Ali and Nusrat Saheb and Parveen Sultana and you know, Noor Jahan and all.
[Guest]: So there is that again, that strange connection to a home you have not seen, but you have been told that was our home and there is connection to that land,
[Guest]: to that culture, to that language and you kind of want to connect to that in some ways.
[Guest]: And in spite of all the political divides that exist and have been constantly nurtured by both the governments,
[Guest]: in spite of that, you kind of want to transcend that border and reach those people and reach that language and music and whatever can come to us,
[Guest]: food and all other things cannot reach us, food and clothes. So that is another, maybe one of the forever ones of my life. So that collection again, I can't choose anything like particular,
[Guest]: but all the artists who have been there. Thirdly, in cinema, it's mostly, I would say, Iranian cinema, which has really, really influenced me,
[Guest]: which I consider to be the most transformative and then the cinema of Satyajit Ray, which again, you used to listen to it for a while,
[Guest]: Satyajit Ray is great and it had been said many times, so it was getting more and more that you had seen and you did not understand,
[Guest]: so basically you are a fool. So because of that, I stayed away for a long time, I did not see and whatever little snatches I saw,
[Guest]: they were on badly, you know, whatever preserved DVDs of his initial films, the Upoot Trilogy. So it was very bad, so I got scared,
[Guest]: that I don't know, I will have to put a lot of effort to understand this, but then at some point I kind of overcame that fear.
[Guest]: And then the cinema that I got to see, that is something which gave me immense confidence in telling our stories,
[Guest]: telling our stories in whatever, you know, whatever level of craft we know and then at some point that, as I said,
[Guest]: aesthetic is its own, you know, authenticity is its own aesthetic. So trust in that part that, okay, as long as you are authentic,
[Guest]: craft will take care of its own. So that will happen. You just have to go in authenticity and that's what I think Mr. Ray and his cinema
[Guest]: kind of taught me and especially the Upoot Trilogy and then the Calcutta Trilogy. These were two.
[Guest]: And then how he kind of, his last film also, Aagantuk, jo ek cheez hum dekhte hain generally ki after a point,
[Guest]: most of the creators kind of have a burnout or kind of lose interest or kind of take things for granted,
[Guest]: but it was like to see that film and to know ki ye unki aakhari film hai, which is, I think, true for a lot of great artists.
[Guest]: The last work they have created is really impactful, is something where it kind of looks like they knew this is their last work.
[Guest]: And sometimes they do know and sometimes they don't, like Miyazaki's last film, The Wind Rises, again, has that quality of someone
[Guest]: very clearly like writing the last chapter of their autobiography or, you know, last. So it's very clear.
[Guest]: This is what they want the world to kind of think about them and their work and how they have interacted with the world,
[Guest]: which is very, very clear in Satyajit Ray's last work also. And that just the entire filmography of Mr. Ray.
[Guest]: That has not just inspired me in a, whatever, in an artistic manner, ki okay, this is the kind of artist I aspire to be and all.
[Guest]: But generally how to, like again, how to just interact with the world on a day-to-day basis and stay curious forever,
[Guest]: forever you can afford to. Of course, at some point the health will take over and probably can't stay curious enough
[Guest]: about things outside of yourself. But again, I would say then there are, of course, snatches of world cinema.
[Guest]: There's some French film and then say Michael Hennecke has been really serious, I mean, influence and someone who is very, very impressive.
[Guest]: Or Kieslowski, again, another great artist who is just so involved in the characters and in the stories
[Guest]: and always finding the humanity in people, no matter what, you know, how, how, how, whatever.
[Guest]: For me, Decalogue is like just a peak of filmmaking. Absolutely. Absolutely. Decalogue and The Three Colors.
[Guest]: And then there are other, these some of his other works, which are outside of Decalogue,
[Guest]: which were kind of the full length features out of Decalogue. Those two films, short film about killing and love.
[Guest]: And so all of that is, it just creates a new, you know, it's not just almost like it's not a new aesthetic.
[Guest]: It's a new form of filmmaking, which he created with those, you know, with his very, it's not a big body of work he has created.
[Guest]: And still it is so impactful. So these are some of the people I would say.
[Guest]: Then books. I have read a lot of Hindi. I have read less English.
[Guest]: Whatever I have read, again, because I have not read a lot, I do not have that much distinction.
[Guest]: But the book that influenced me the most in the beginning, the English book, was Arundhati Roy's God of Small Things.
[Guest]: The first time I read it, I just, I was blown away that this kind of poetry is possible in English.
[Guest]: I have read a lot of poetry and poetic books in Hindi, in which almost the language is flowing like poetry.
[Guest]: From Dharamveer Bharti to Harishankar Parsai's Satyar, or Shrilal Shukla's Raag Darbari, or Uday Prakash, one of the recent, I would say, recent greats.
[Guest]: There have been two periods in Hindi, in a way, I think, a pre-70s generation, which were all the legends of Hindi literature and even Urdu literature of those times.
[Guest]: And then there was a lull almost, post-70s, there have been very few, but 70s to 2000s is one period where, you know, Uday Prakash was there.
[Guest]: Then there is that post Chetan Bhagat generation, which is the new, you know, new wave of Hindi literature, which is very, kind of after Chetan Bhagat, kind of, you know, showed the world that these very simple stories about concerns of the modern youth can kind of have a market value.
[Guest]: And then after that, there was a new period in Hindi, in which today's writers are Satya Vyas and Nikhil Sachan.
[Guest]: So, that is a different period, I have not read that much and I mean, I cannot relate to it.
[Guest]: But in pre-70s, Manohar Shyam Joshi is someone, I am like constantly amazed by his writing.
[Guest]: Nayyar Masood is one Urdu writer, whom I recently discovered some 2-3 years ago.
[Guest]: And I do not think that in the whole world, if you make a list of top 5 short stories, of course, it is a very subjective kind of a thing.
[Guest]: But short story, oh wow, Nayyar Masood Sahib.
[Guest]: So, this is a collection of his short stories.
[Guest]: English collection, yeah, collected short stories of his.
[Guest]: So, if you can read him in Hindi, it will be amazing.
[Unknown]: I do not know how much it will be translated.
[Guest]: But again, I think you will get the impact, at least just the craft of it.
[Guest]: And because weaving a short story is a very, very delicate craft.
[Guest]: So, I read Nayyar Masood Sahib and suddenly, I mean, all the short stories I have read,
[Guest]: they all became one and then Nayyar Masood came in front.
[Guest]: Because he was, I think, at some point he was translating a lot of Kafka into Urdu.
[Guest]: So, he has that, whatever that eye for abstract and weird and bizarre and still has that language of the Lucknow ki ek bahuti sundar si zabaan.
[Guest]: Aur phir us zabaan ke jo details hain aur phir us world ke jo details hain Lucknow ke jo unhone dekha hai 50s, 60s, 70s ka shayad.
[Guest]: Khas kar gaya, I think, 60s to 80s wala jo daur tha Lucknow ka.
[Guest]: Toh Nayyar Masood hain, unki wajah se maine actually one of the reasons I learnt reading Urdu
[Guest]: because unki bahut kam kahaniyan Hindi mein translate hui hain.
[Guest]: Aur Hindi mein hoti hain toh phir bhi bahut saare Urdu lafz rehte hain usme.
[Guest]: Lekin, toh isliye Hindi mein padhne mein maza aata hai.
[Guest]: But phir bhi maine socha ki original Urdu mein jo likha hai aur bahut saari kahaniyan jo ussi mein hain abhi bhi exist karti hain,
[Guest]: jo abhi tak translate bhi nahi hui hain.
[Guest]: So, Nayyar Masood is another great writer.
[Guest]: I am very, very blessed to read.
[Guest]: And then Shams-ur-Rehman Faruqi sahab.
[Guest]: Again, another...
[Guest]: Madhav unko sirf writer kehna, he was one of the, I think, greatest critics and observer of language and culture
[Guest]: aur jo unka interpretation jo raha hai, poetry ka, Ghalib ka, Akbar-e-Ilaabadi ka
[Guest]: ya aur Urdu kya jo bhi ek pura culture raha hai, Urdu literary world ka.
[Guest]: So, he has constantly been...
[Guest]: He was constantly adding more insights and layers to our understanding of what they have achieved in that world.
[Guest]: Aur unka phir abhi recently jo, recently mein log kuch time ho gaya hai, khair, maine recently padha hai,
[Guest]: Kahi Chaan The Sar-e-Asma, that novel,
[Guest]: jo ki ek toh itna ghazab ka premise hai, uska about just Daag-Dehlvi jo Urdu ke shayar rahe.
[Guest]: Unka lineage unhone kuch 600-700 saal ki kahaani hain.
[Guest]: 600-700 saal ki aur 400-500 saal, kam se kam 500 saal ki, before the British era.
[Guest]: And wahaan se unki lineage trace karte karte, har generation ki kahaani hain aur kis tare se wo yahaan tak pauche,
[Guest]: jahaan pe finally we come to Daag-Dehlvi.
[Guest]: But it's the story of Daag-Dehlvi, actually the central character is Daag-Dehlvi's mother.
[Guest]: But unke upar jaate jaate kahaniya, itni saari kahaniya usme khulti jaate hain aur har kahani,
[Guest]: har page main kai-kai baar padhta hoon, kyunki har description khubsurat hai aur har description.
[Guest]: And it's a, at some points you think, okay, it's not a, it is not fiction because a lot of it is actually oral history of that family.
[Guest]: But then at most of the points, it is just an anthropological study of those times and cultures.
[Guest]: Jab wo kapdon ki baat karte hain, toh wo 2-3 page main wo kapda banta kaise tha,
[Guest]: kaunsi cheez usme kahaan se aati thi, kaise weaving process kya tha, rang kahaan se aata tha,
[Guest]: aur phir wo moti kahaan se aate the, aur kis tare se usko pehna jaata tha, kis tare se usko dhoya jaata tha.
[Guest]: 2-3 page uspe hain, phir koi khaani ki agar baat ho rahi hai, toh phir wo recipe kahaan se chalke wahaan tak aayi thi,
[Guest]: aur kaise wo banti hai, aur kaise usko khaate hain, aur agar wo zyada khalo toh bimaar ho jao,
[Guest]: toh phir uska ilaaj kya hai, us tare ki bahut saari galiyon mein wo leke jaate hain,
[Guest]: aur us tare ki koi cheez maine kabhi padhi hi nahi hain.
[Guest]: Us tare ka koi novel, I don't think, exist karta hai duniya mein, where it is as much a novel,
[Guest]: as a historical document, as an anthropological study, as just whatever,
[Guest]: as an encyclopedia of a particular time period in a particular kind of family,
[Guest]: just encyclopedia about everything from customs to clothing to food.
[Guest]: Toh yeh kuch cheezein hain jo bahut pasand hain, jo top of my mind maine boli.
[Guest]: Uske alawa, of course, there are thousand other things which I can't really think of right now.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot for these. And just for the listeners, a brief interruption,
[Amit Varma]: when Varun was mentioning Nair Masood Sahib, as I happen to have an English translation of his collected stories on my desk,
[Amit Varma]: so he kind of spotted that. And this also happened a few episodes ago, I think in December,
[Amit Varma]: I had Sara Rai, who's very fine writer, granddaughter of Munshi Premchand, but a very fine writer, you should read her.
[Amit Varma]: So she had also mentioned Nair Masood and then she spotted the book, which was on the shelf at that time.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned last films, and you know, that's very interesting, like Louis Buuel's last three films, for example,
[Amit Varma]: which he made in the 70s, or John Huston made The Dead, which was based on the James Joyce short story,
[Amit Varma]: which is so moving. One of those films that really made a mark on me.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also struck by, you know, what you said about Ray, that it was more than a cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And I think I know what you mean, that it was more than the aesthetic.
[Amit Varma]: It's also the ethic of engaging with the world in the way that he did till his last days.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also an ethic that I clearly, you know, see in you as well, in your work.
[Amit Varma]: So hoping for more conversations and, you know, to see much more of your work.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much, boss. You've, you know, spent quite a few hours. There's been a fire outside.
[Guest]: I don't know what's going on in the world. Twitter must be missing you. It was a crazy day. No, I'm missing Twitter. Twitter is not missing me.
[Guest]: I tweet rarely nowadays, but yeah, I keep scrolling and finding more and more things to make me anxious.
[Guest]: It's called doom scrolling. Yeah, it's called doom scrolling.
[Guest]: So then I thought that Insta is kind of pleasure scrolling, but now Insta is also turning into doom scrolling.
[Guest]: Wow, really? Okay. Where should I go now? I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Just build a nest in your own mind. Where should I go?
[Guest]: So it was a lot of fun. I think if I don't know, I feel like I kind of rambled a lot,
[Guest]: but I think that's also the fun of this podcast that you allow people to ramble and then you find things to kind of from that,
[Guest]: whatever from that long kind of ramble.
[Amit Varma]: No, I keep the full ramble because I think the ramble is a point here.
[Amit Varma]: I think too many people listen to a conversation and they'll be like, what are the bullet points?
[Amit Varma]: What are the takeaways? Like, you know, we don't want that.
[Amit Varma]: There should be a place where we can have an informal conversation.
[Guest]: That's why in the beginning, when I heard the podcast, but then you kind of keep telling yourself,
[Guest]: I'm not that kind of person who will ramble and then it was great fun, actually.
[Guest]: And we will hopefully do another soon.
[Guest]: But yeah, depending on how much love or hate we get, we should not care, actually.
[Amit Varma]: We should not care, but depending on how you feel about this later.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, we'll see about that later. But thank you so much for today.
[Guest]: Thank you. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.